[The Man Who Was Thursday by G. K. Chesterton 1908]

To Edmund Clerihew Bentley

A cloud was on the mind of men, and wailing went the weather,
Yea, a sick cloud upon the soul when we were boys together.
Science announced nonentity and art admired decay;
The world was old and ended: but you and I were gay;
Round us in antic order their crippled vices came--
Lust that had lost its laughter, fear that had lost its shame.
Like the white lock of Whistler, that lit our aimless gloom,
Men showed their own white feather as proudly as a plume.
Life was a fly that faded, and death a drone that stung;
The world was very old indeed when you and I were young.
They twisted even decent sin to shapes not to be named:
Men were ashamed of honour; but we were not ashamed.
Weak if we were and foolish, not thus we failed, not thus;
When that black Baal blocked the heavens he had no hymns from us
Children we were--our forts of sand were even as weak as eve,
High as they went we piled them up to break that bitter sea.
Fools as we were in motley, all jangling and absurd,
When all church bells were silent our cap and beds were heard.

Not all unhelped we held the fort, our tiny flags unfurled;
Some giants laboured in that cloud to lift it from the world.
I find again the book we found, I feel the hour that flings
Far out of fish-shaped Paumanok some cry of cleaner things;
And the Green Carnation withered, as in forest fires that pass,
Roared in the wind of all the world ten million leaves of grass;
Or sane and sweet and sudden as a bird sings in the rain--
Truth out of Tusitala spoke and pleasure out of pain.
Yea, cool and clear and sudden as a bird sings in the grey,
Dunedin to Samoa spoke, and darkness unto day.
But we were young; we lived to see God break their bitter charms.
God and the good Republic come riding back in arms:
We have seen the City of Mansoul, even as it rocked, relieved--
Blessed are they who did not see, but being blind, believed.

This is a tale of those old fears, even of those emptied hells,
And none but you shall understand the true thing that it tells--
Of what colossal gods of shame could cow men and yet crash,
Of what huge devils hid the stars, yet fell at a pistol flash.
The doubts that were so plain to chase, so dreadful to withstand--
Oh, who shall understand but you; yea, who shall understand?
The doubts that drove us through the night as we two talked amain,
And day had broken on the streets e'er it broke upon the brain.
Between us, by the peace of God, such truth can now be told;
Yea, there is strength in striking root and good in growing old.
We have found common things at last and marriage and a creed,
And I may safely write it now, and you may safely read.

G. K. C.



CHAPTER I

THE TWO POETS OF SAFFRON PARK

THE suburb of Saffron Park lay on the sunset side of London, as
red and ragged as a cloud of sunset. It was built of a bright
brick throughout; its sky-line was fantastic, and even its ground
plan was wild. It had been the outburst of a speculative builder,
faintly tinged with art, who called its architecture sometimes
Elizabethan and sometimes Queen Anne, apparently under the
impression that the two sovereigns were identical. It was described
with some justice as an artistic colony, though it never in any
definable way produced any art. But although its pretensions to be
an intellectual centre were a little vague, its pretensions to be a
pleasant place were quite indisputable. The stranger who looked for
the first time at the quaint red houses could only think how very
oddly shaped the people must be who could fit in to them. Nor when
he met the people was he disappointed in this respect. The place
was not only pleasant, but perfect, if once he could regard it not
as a deception but rather as a dream. Even if the people were not
"artists," the whole was nevertheless artistic. That young man with
the long, auburn hair and the impudent face--that young man was not
really a poet; but surely he was a poem. That old gentleman with
the wild, white beard and the wild, white hat--that venerable
humbug was not really a philosopher; but at least he was the cause
of philosophy in others. That scientific gentleman with the bald,
egg-like head and the bare, bird-like neck had no real right to the
airs of science that he assumed. He had not discovered anything new
in biology; but what biological creature could he have discovered
more singular than himself? Thus, and thus only, the whole place
had properly to be regarded; it had to be considered not so much
as a workshop for artists, but as a frail but finished work of art.
A man who stepped into its social atmosphere felt as if he had
stepped into a written comedy.

More especially this attractive unreality fell upon it about
nightfall, when the extravagant roofs were dark against the
afterglow and the whole insane village seemed as separate as a
drifting cloud. This again was more strongly true of the many
nights of local festivity, when the little gardens were often
illuminated, and the big Chinese lanterns glowed in the dwarfish
trees like some fierce and monstrous fruit. And this was strongest
of all on one particular evening, still vaguely remembered in the
locality, of which the auburn-haired poet was the hero. It was not
by any means the only evening of which he was the hero. On many
nights those passing by his little back garden might hear his high,
didactic voice laying down the law to men and particularly to
women. The attitude of women in such cases was indeed one of the
paradoxes of the place. Most of the women were of the kind vaguely
called emancipated, and professed some protest against male
supremacy. Yet these new women would always pay to a man the
extravagant compliment which no ordinary woman ever pays to him,
that of listening while he is talking. And Mr. Lucian Gregory, the
red-haired poet, was really (in some sense) a man worth listening
to, even if one only laughed at the end of it. He put the old cant
of the lawlessness of art and the art of lawlessness with a certain
impudent freshness which gave at least a momentary pleasure. He was
helped in some degree by the arresting oddity of his appearance,
which he worked, as the phrase goes, for all it was worth. His dark
red hair parted in the middle was literally like a woman's, and
curved into the slow curls of a virgin in a pre-Raphaelite picture.
From within this almost saintly oval, however, his face projected
suddenly broad and brutal, the chin carried forward with a look of
cockney contempt. This combination at once tickled and terrified
the nerves of a neurotic population. He seemed like a walking
blasphemy, a blend of the angel and the ape.

This particular evening, if it is remembered for nothing else,
will be remembered in that place for its strange sunset. It looked
like the end of the world. All the heaven seemed covered with a
quite vivid and palpable plumage; you could only say that the sky
was full of feathers, and of feathers that almost brushed the
face. Across the great part of the dome they were grey, with the
strangest tints of violet and mauve and an unnatural pink or pale
green; but towards the west the whole grew past description,
transparent and passionate, and the last red-hot plumes of it
covered up the sun like something too good to be seen. The whole
was so close about the earth, as to express nothing but a violent
secrecy. The very empyrean seemed to be a secret. It expressed
that splendid smallness which is the soul of local patriotism. The
very sky seemed small.

I say that there are some inhabitants who may remember the evening
if only by that oppressive sky. There are others who may remember
it because it marked the first appearance in the place of the
second poet of Saffron Park. For a long time the red-haired
revolutionary had reigned without a rival; it was upon the night
of the sunset that his solitude suddenly ended. The new poet, who
introduced himself by the name of Gabriel Syme was a very
mild-looking mortal, with a fair, pointed beard and faint, yellow
hair. But an impression grew that he was less meek than he looked.
He signalised his entrance by differing with the established poet,
Gregory, upon the whole nature of poetry. He said that he (Syme)
was poet of law, a poet of order; nay, he said he was a poet of
respectability. So all the Saffron Parkers looked at him as if he
had that moment fallen out of that impossible sky.

In fact, Mr. Lucian Gregory, the anarchic poet, connected the two
events.

"It may well be," he said, in his sudden lyrical manner, "it may
well be on such a night of clouds and cruel colours that there is
brought forth upon the earth such a portent as a respectable poet.
You say you are a poet of law; I say you are a contradiction in
terms. I only wonder there were not comets and earthquakes on the
night you appeared in this garden."

The man with the meek blue eyes and the pale, pointed beard endured
these thunders with a certain submissive solemnity. The third party
of the group, Gregory's sister Rosamond, who had her brother's
braids of red hair, but a kindlier face underneath them, laughed
with such mixture of admiration and disapproval as she gave
commonly to the family oracle.

Gregory resumed in high oratorical good humour.

"An artist is identical with an anarchist," he cried. "You might
transpose the words anywhere. An anarchist is an artist. The man
who throws a bomb is an artist, because he prefers a great moment
to everything. He sees how much more valuable is one burst of
blazing light, one peal of perfect thunder, than the mere common
bodies of a few shapeless policemen. An artist disregards all
governments, abolishes all conventions. The poet delights in
disorder only. If it were not so, the most poetical thing in the
world would be the Underground Railway."

"So it is," said Mr. Syme.

"Nonsense!" said Gregory, who was very rational when anyone else
attempted paradox. "Why do all the clerks and navvies in the
railway trains look so sad and tired, so very sad and tired? I will
tell you. It is because they know that the train is going right. It
is because they know that whatever place they have taken a ticket
for that place they will reach. It is because after they have
passed Sloane Square they know that the next station must be
Victoria, and nothing but Victoria. Oh, their wild rapture! oh,
their eyes like stars and their souls again in Eden, if the next
station were unaccountably Baker Street!"

"It is you who are unpoetical," replied the poet Syme. "If what you
say of clerks is true, they can only be as prosaic as your poetry.
The rare, strange thing is to hit the mark; the gross, obvious
thing is to miss it. We feel it is epical when man with one wild
arrow strikes a distant bird. Is it not also epical when man with
one wild engine strikes a distant station? Chaos is dull; because
in chaos the train might indeed go anywhere, to Baker Street or to
Bagdad. But man is a magician, and his whole magic is in this, that
he does say Victoria, and lo! it is Victoria. No, take your books
of mere poetry and prose; let me read a time table, with tears of
pride. Take your Byron, who commemorates the defeats of man; give
me Bradshaw, who commemorates his victories. Give me Bradshaw, I
say!"

"Must you go?" inquired Gregory sarcastically.

"I tell you," went on Syme with passion, "that every time a train
comes in I feel that it has broken past batteries of besiegers, and
that man has won a battle against chaos. You say contemptuously
that when one has left Sloane Square one must come to Victoria. I
say that one might do a thousand things instead, and that whenever
I really come there I have the sense of hairbreadth escape. And
when I hear the guard shout out the word 'Victoria,' it is not an
unmeaning word. It is to me the cry of a herald announcing
conquest. It is to me indeed 'Victoria'; it is the victory of
Adam."

Gregory wagged his heavy, red head with a slow and sad smile.

"And even then," he said, "we poets always ask the question, 'And
what is Victoria now that you have got there ?' You think Victoria
is like the New Jerusalem. We know that the New Jerusalem will only
be like Victoria. Yes, the poet will be discontented even in the
streets of heaven. The poet is always in revolt."

"There again," said Syme irritably, "what is there poetical about
being in revolt ? You might as well say that it is poetical to be
sea-sick. Being sick is a revolt. Both being sick and being
rebellious may be the wholesome thing on certain desperate
occasions; but I'm hanged if I can see why they are poetical.
Revolt in the abstract is--revolting. It's mere vomiting."

The girl winced for a flash at the unpleasant word, but Syme was
too hot to heed her.

"It is things going right," he cried, "that is poetical I Our
digestions, for instance, going sacredly and silently right, that
is the foundation of all poetry. Yes, the most poetical thing, more
poetical than the flowers, more poetical than the stars--the most
poetical thing in the world is not being sick."

"Really," said Gregory superciliously, "the examples you choose--"

"I beg your pardon," said Syme grimly, "I forgot we had abolished
all conventions."

For the first time a red patch appeared on Gregory's forehead.

"You don't expect me," he said, "to revolutionise society on this
lawn ?"

Syme looked straight into his eyes and smiled sweetly.

"No, I don't," he said; "but I suppose that if you were serious
about your anarchism, that is exactly what you would do."

Gregory's big bull's eyes blinked suddenly like those of an angry
lion, and one could almost fancy that his red mane rose.

"Don't you think, then," he said in a dangerous voice, "that I am
serious about my anarchism?"

"I beg your pardon ?" said Syme.

"Am I not serious about my anarchism ?" cried Gregory, with knotted
fists.

"My dear fellow!" said Syme, and strolled away.

With surprise, but with a curious pleasure, he found Rosamond
Gregory still in his company.

"Mr. Syme," she said, "do the people who talk like you and my
brother often mean what they say ? Do you mean what you say now ?"

Syme smiled.

"Do you ?" he asked.

"What do you mean ?" asked the girl, with grave eyes.

"My dear Miss Gregory," said Syme gently, "there are many kinds of
sincerity and insincerity. When you say 'thank you' for the salt,
do you mean what you say ? No. When you say 'the world is round,'
do you mean what you say ? No. It is true, but you don't mean it.
Now, sometimes a man like your brother really finds a thing he does
mean. It may be only a half-truth, quarter-truth, tenth-truth; but
then he says more than he means--from sheer force of meaning it."

She was looking at him from under level brows; her face was grave
and open, and there had fallen upon it the shadow of that
unreasoning responsibility which is at the bottom of the most
frivolous woman, the maternal watch which is as old as the world.

"Is he really an anarchist, then?" she asked.

"Only in that sense I speak of," replied Syme; "or if you prefer
it, in that nonsense."

She drew her broad brows together and said abruptly--

"He wouldn't really use--bombs or that sort of thing?"

Syme broke into a great laugh, that seemed too large for his slight
and somewhat dandified figure.

"Good Lord, no!" he said, "that has to be done anonymously."

And at that the corners of her own mouth broke into a smile, and
she thought with a simultaneous pleasure of Gregory's absurdity
and of his safety.

Syme strolled with her to a seat in the corner of the garden, and
continued to pour out his opinions. For he was a sincere man, and
in spite of his superficial airs and graces, at root a humble one.
And it is always the humble man who talks too much; the proud man
watches himself too closely. He defended respectability with
violence and exaggeration. He grew passionate in his praise of
tidiness and propriety. All the time there was a smell of lilac
all round him. Once he heard very faintly in some distant street a
barrel-organ begin to play, and it seemed to him that his heroic
words were moving to a tiny tune from under or beyond the world.

He stared and talked at the girl's red hair and amused face for
what seemed to be a few minutes; and then, feeling that the groups
in such a place should mix, rose to his feet. To his astonishment,
he discovered the whole garden empty. Everyone had gone long ago,
and he went himself with a rather hurried apology. He left with a
sense of champagne in his head, which he could not afterwards
explain. In the wild events which were to follow this girl had no
part at all; he never saw her again until all his tale was over.
And yet, in some indescribable way, she kept recurring like a
motive in music through all his mad adventures afterwards, and the
glory of her strange hair ran like a red thread through those dark
and ill-drawn tapestries of the night. For what followed was so
improbable, that it might well have been a dream.

When Syme went out into the starlit street, he found it for the
moment empty. Then he realised (in some odd way) that the silence
was rather a living silence than a dead one. Directly outside the
door stood a street lamp, whose gleam gilded the leaves of the tree
that bent out over the fence behind him. About a foot from the
lamp-post stood a figure almost as rigid and motionless as the
lamp-post itself. The tall hat and long frock coat were black; the
face, in an abrupt shadow, was almost as dark. Only a fringe of
fiery hair against the light, and also something aggressive in the
attitude, proclaimed that it was the poet Gregory. He had something
of the look of a masked bravo waiting sword in hand for his foe.

He made a sort of doubtful salute, which Syme somewhat more
formally returned.

"I was waiting for you," said Gregory. "Might I have a moment's
conversation?"

"Certainly. About what?" asked Syme in a sort of weak wonder.

Gregory struck out with his stick at the lamp-post, and then at the
tree. "About this and this," he cried; "about order and anarchy.
There is your precious order, that lean, iron lamp, ugly and
barren; and there is anarchy, rich, living, reproducing
itself--there is anarchy, splendid in green and gold."

"All the same," replied Syme patiently, "just at present you only
see the tree by the light of the lamp. I wonder when you would ever
see the lamp by the light of the tree." Then after a pause he said,
"But may I ask if you have been standing out here in the dark only
to resume our little argument?"

"No," cried out Gregory, in a voice that rang down the street, "I
did not stand here to resume our argument, but to end it for ever."

The silence fell again, and Syme, though he understood nothing,
listened instinctively for something serious. Gregory began in a
smooth voice and with a rather bewildering smile.

"Mr. Syme," he said, "this evening you succeeded in doing something
rather remarkable. You did something to me that no man born of
woman has ever succeeded in doing before."

"Indeed!"

"Now I remember," resumed Gregory reflectively, "one other person
succeeded in doing it. The captain of a penny steamer (if I
remember correctly) at Southend. You have irritated me."

"I am very sorry," replied Syme with gravity.

"I am afraid my fury and your insult are too shocking to be wiped
out even with an apology," said Gregory very calmly. "No duel
could wipe it out. If I struck you dead I could not wipe it out.
There is only one way by which that insult can be erased, and that
way I choose. I am going, at the possible sacrifice of my life and
honour, to prove to you that you were wrong in what you said."

"In what I said?"

"You said I was not serious about being an anarchist."

"There are degrees of seriousness," replied Syme. "I have never
doubted that you were perfectly sincere in this sense, that you
thought what you said well worth saying, that you thought a
paradox might wake men up to a neglected truth."

Gregory stared at him steadily and painfully.

"And in no other sense," he asked, "you think me serious? You think
me a flaneur who lets fall occasional truths. You do not think that
in a deeper, a more deadly sense, I am serious."

Syme struck his stick violently on the stones of the road.

"Serious!" he cried. "Good Lord! is this street serious? Are these
damned Chinese lanterns serious? Is the whole caboodle serious?
One comes here and talks a pack of bosh, and perhaps some sense as
well, but I should think very little of a man who didn't keep
something in the background of his life that was more serious than
all this talking--something more serious, whether it was religion
or only drink."

"Very well," said Gregory, his face darkening, "you shall see
something more serious than either drink or religion."

Syme stood waiting with his usual air of mildness until Gregory
again opened his lips.

"You spoke just now of having a religion. Is it really true that
you have one?"

"Oh," said Syme with a beaming smile, "we are all Catholics now."

"Then may I ask you to swear by whatever gods or saints your
religion involves that you will not reveal what I am now going to
tell you to any son of Adam, and especially not to the police?
Will you swear that! If you will take upon yourself this awful
abnegations if you will consent to burden your soul with a vow
that you should never make and a knowledge you should never dream
about, I will promise you in return--"

"You will promise me in return?" inquired Syme, as the other
paused.

"I will promise you a very entertaining evening." Syme suddenly
took off his hat.

"Your offer," he said, "is far too idiotic to be declined. You say
that a poet is always an anarchist. I disagree; but I hope at least
that he is always a sportsman. Permit me, here and now, to swear as
a Christian, and promise as a good comrade and a fellow-artist,
that I will not report anything of this, whatever it is, to the
police. And now, in the name of Colney Hatch, what is it?"

"I think," said Gregory, with placid irrelevancy, "that we will
call a cab."

He gave two long whistles, and a hansom came rattling down the
road. The two got into it in silence. Gregory gave through the
trap the address of an obscure public-house on the Chiswick bank
of the river. The cab whisked itself away again, and in it these
two fantastics quitted their fantastic town.



CHAPTER II

THE SECRET OF GABRIEL SYME

THE cab pulled up before a particularly dreary and greasy beershop,
into which Gregory rapidly conducted his companion. They seated
themselves in a close and dim sort of bar-parlour, at a stained
wooden table with one wooden leg. The room was so small and dark,
that very little could be seen of the attendant who was summoned,
beyond a vague and dark impression of something bulky and bearded.

"Will you take a little supper?" asked Gregory politely. "The pate
de foie gras is not good here, but I can recommend the game."

Syme received the remark with stolidity, imagining it to be a joke.
Accepting the vein of humour, he said, with a well-bred
indifference--

"Oh, bring me some lobster mayonnaise."

To his indescribable astonishment, the man only said "Certainly,
sir!" and went away apparently to get it.

"What will you drink?" resumed Gregory, with the same careless yet
apologetic air. "I shall only have a crepe de menthe myself; I have
dined. But the champagne can really be trusted. Do let me start you
with a half-bottle of Pommery at least?"

"Thank you!" said the motionless Syme. "You are very good."

His further attempts at conversation, somewhat disorganised in
themselves, were cut short finally as by a thunderbolt by the
actual appearance of the lobster. Syme tasted it, and found it
particularly good. Then he suddenly began to eat with great
rapidity and appetite.

"Excuse me if I enjoy myself rather obviously!" he said to Gregory,
smiling. "I don't often have the luck to have a dream like this. It
is new to me for a nightmare to lead to a lobster. It is commonly
the other way."

"You are not asleep, I assure you," said Gregory. "You are, on the
contrary, close to the most actual and rousing moment of your
existence. Ah, here comes your champagne! I admit that there may be
a slight disproportion, let us say, between the inner arrangements
of this excellent hotel and its simple and unpretentious exterior.
But that is all our modesty. We are the most modest men that ever
lived on earth."

"And who are we?" asked Syme, emptying his champagne glass.

"It is quite simple," replied Gregory. "We are the serious
anarchists, in whom you do not believe."

"Oh!" said Syme shortly. "You do yourselves well in drinks."

"Yes, we are serious about everything," answered Gregory.

Then after a pause he added--

"If in a few moments this table begins to turn round a little,
don't put it down to your inroads into the champagne. I don't wish
you to do yourself an injustice."

"Well, if I am not drunk, I am mad," replied Syme with perfect
calm; "but I trust I can behave like a gentleman in either
condition. May I smoke?"

"Certainly!" said Gregory, producing a cigar-case. "Try one of
mine."

Syme took the cigar, clipped the end off with a cigar-cutter out
of his waistcoat pocket, put it in his mouth, lit it slowly, and
let out a long cloud of smoke. It is not a little to his credit
that he performed these rites with so much composure, for almost
before he had begun them the table at which he sat had begun to
revolve, first slowly, and then rapidly, as if at an insane
seance.

"You must not mind it," said Gregory; "it's a kind of screw."

"Quite so," said Syme placidly, "a kind of screw. How simple that
is!"

The next moment the smoke of his cigar, which had been wavering
across the room in snaky twists, went straight up as if from a
factory chimney, and the two, with their chairs and table, shot
down through the floor as if the earth had swallowed them. They
went rattling down a kind of roaring chimney as rapidly as a lift
cut loose, and they came with an abrupt bump to the bottom. But
when Gregory threw open a pair of doors and let in a red
subterranean light, Syme was still smoking with one leg thrown
over the other, and had not turned a yellow hair.

Gregory led him down a low, vaulted passage, at the end of which
was the red light. It was an enormous crimson lantern, nearly as
big as a fireplace, fixed over a small but heavy iron door. In the
door there was a sort of hatchway or grating, and on this Gregory
struck five times. A heavy voice with a foreign accent asked him
who he was. To this he gave the more or less unexpected reply,
"Mr. Joseph Chamberlain." The heavy hinges began to move; it was
obviously some kind of password.

Inside the doorway the passage gleamed as if it were lined with a
network of steel. On a second glance, Syme saw that the glittering
pattern was really made up of ranks and ranks of rifles and
revolvers, closely packed or interlocked.

"I must ask you to forgive me all these formalities," said Gregory;
"we have to be very strict here."

"Oh, don't apologise," said Syme. "I know your passion for law and
order," and he stepped into the passage lined with the steel
weapons. With his long, fair hair and rather foppish frock-coat, he
looked a singularly frail and fanciful figure as he walked down
that shining avenue of death.

They passed through several such passages, and came out at last
into a queer steel chamber with curved walls, almost spherical in
shape, but presenting, with its tiers of benches, something of the
appearance of a scientific lecture-theatre. There were no rifles or
pistols in this apartment, but round the walls of it were hung more
dubious and dreadful shapes, things that looked like the bulbs of
iron plants, or the eggs of iron birds. They were bombs, and the
very room itself seemed like the inside of a bomb. Syme knocked his
cigar ash off against the wall, and went in.

"And now, my dear Mr. Syme," said Gregory, throwing himself in an
expansive manner on the bench under the largest bomb, "now we are
quite cosy, so let us talk properly. Now no human words can give
you any notion of why I brought you here. It was one of those quite
arbitrary emotions, like jumping off a cliff or falling in love.
Suffice it to say that you were an inexpressibly irritating fellow,
and, to do you justice, you are still. I would break twenty oaths
of secrecy for the pleasure of taking you down a peg. That way you
have of lighting a cigar would make a priest break the seal of
confession. Well, you said that you were quite certain I was not a
serious anarchist. Does this place strike you as being serious?"

"It does seem to have a moral under all its gaiety," assented
Syme; "but may I ask you two questions? You need not fear to give
me information, because, as you remember, you very wisely extorted
from me a promise not to tell the police, a promise I shall
certainly keep. So it is in mere curiosity that I make my queries.
First of all, what is it really all about? What is it you object
to? You want to abolish Government?"

"To abolish God!" said Gregory, opening the eyes of a fanatic. "We
do not only want to upset a few despotisms and police regulations;
that sort of anarchism does exist, but it is a mere branch of the
Nonconformists. We dig deeper and we blow you higher. We wish to
deny all those arbitrary distinctions of vice and virtue, honour
and treachery, upon which mere rebels base themselves. The silly
sentimentalists of the French Revolution talked of the Rights of
Man! We hate Rights as we hate Wrongs. We have abolished Right and
Wrong."

"And Right and Left," said Syme with a simple eagerness, "I hope
you will abolish them too. They are much more troublesome to me."

"You spoke of a second question," snapped Gregory.

"With pleasure," resumed Syme. "In all your present acts and
surroundings there is a scientific attempt at secrecy. I have an
aunt who lived over a shop, but this is the first time I have
found people living from preference under a public-house. You have
a heavy iron door. You cannot pass it without submitting to the
humiliation of calling yourself Mr. Chamberlain. You surround
yourself with steel instruments which make the place, if I may say
so, more impressive than homelike. May I ask why, after taking all
this trouble to barricade yourselves in the bowels of the earth,
you then parade your whole secret by talking about anarchism to
every silly woman in Saffron Park?"

Gregory smiled.

"The answer is simple," he said. "I told you I was a serious
anarchist, and you did not believe me. Nor do they believe me.
Unless I took them into this infernal room they would not believe
me."

Syme smoked thoughtfully, and looked at him with interest. Gregory
went on.

"The history of the thing might amuse you," he said. "When first I
became one of the New Anarchists I tried all kinds of respectable
disguises. I dressed up as a bishop. I read up all about bishops
in our anarchist pamphlets, in Superstition the Vampire and
Priests of Prey. I certainly understood from them that bishops are
strange and terrible old men keeping a cruel secret from mankind.
I was misinformed. When on my first appearing in episcopal gaiters
in a drawing-room I cried out in a voice of thunder, 'Down! down!
presumptuous human reason!' they found out in some way that I was
not a bishop at all. I was nabbed at once. Then I made up as a
millionaire; but I defended Capital with so much intelligence that
a fool could see that I was quite poor. Then I tried being a
major. Now I am a humanitarian myself, but I have, I hope, enough
intellectual breadth to understand the position of those who, like
Nietzsche, admire violence--the proud, mad war of Nature and all
that, you know. I threw myself into the major. I drew my sword and
waved it constantly. I called out 'Blood!' abstractedly, like a
man calling for wine. I often said, 'Let the weak perish; it is
the Law.' Well, well, it seems majors don't do this. I was nabbed
again. At last I went in despair to the President of the Central
Anarchist Council, who is the greatest man in Europe."

"What is his name?" asked Syme.

"You would not know it," answered Gregory. "That is his greatness.
Caesar and Napoleon put all their genius into being heard of, and
they were heard of. He puts all his genius into not being heard of,
and he is not heard of. But you cannot be for five minutes in the
room with him without feeling that Caesar and Napoleon would have
been children in his hands."

He was silent and even pale for a moment, and then resumed--

"But whenever he gives advice it is always something as startling
as an epigram, and yet as practical as the Bank of England. I said
to him, 'What disguise will hide me from the world? What can I find
more respectable than bishops and majors?' He looked at me with his
large but indecipherable face. 'You want a safe disguise, do you?
You want a dress which will guarantee you harmless; a dress in
which no one would ever look for a bomb?' I nodded. He suddenly
lifted his lion's voice. 'Why, then, dress up as an anarchist, you
fool!' he roared so that the room shook. 'Nobody will ever expect
you to do anything dangerous then.' And he turned his broad back
on me without another word. I took his advice, and have never
regretted it. I preached blood and murder to those women day and
night, and--by God!--they would let me wheel their perambulators."

Syme sat watching him with some respect in his large, blue eyes.

"You took me in," he said. "It is really a smart dodge."

Then after a pause he added--

"What do you call this tremendous President of yours?"

"We generally call him Sunday," replied Gregory with simplicity.
'You see, there are seven members of the Central Anarchist
Council, and they are named after days of the week. He is called
Sunday, by some of his admirers Bloody Sunday. It is curious you
should mention the matter, because the very night you have dropped
in (if I may so express it) is the night on which our London
branch, which assembles in this room, has to elect its own deputy
to fill a vacancy in the Council. The gentleman who has for some
time past played, with propriety and general applause, the
difficult part of Thursday, has died quite suddenly. Consequently,
we have called a meeting this very evening to elect a successor."

He got to his feet and strolled across the room with a sort of
smiling embarrassment.

"I feel somehow as if you were my mother, Syme," he continued
casually. "I feel that I can confide anything to you, as you have
promised to tell nobody. In fact, I will confide to you something
that I would not say in so many words to the anarchists who will be
coming to the room in about ten minutes. We shall, of course, go
through a form of election; but I don't mind telling you that it is
practically certain what the result will be." He looked down for a
moment modestly. "It is almost a settled thing that I am to be
Thursday."

"My dear fellow." said Syme heartily, "I congratulate you. A great
career!"

Gregory smiled in deprecation, and walked across the room, talking
rapidly.

"As a matter of fact, everything is ready for me on this table," he
said, "and the ceremony will probably be the shortest possible."

Syme also strolled across to the table, and found lying across it a
walking-stick, which turned out on examination to be a sword-stick,
a large Colt's revolver, a sandwich case, and a formidable flask of
brandy. Over the chair, beside the table, was thrown a
heavy-looking cape or cloak.

"I have only to get the form of election finished," continued
Gregory with animation, "then I snatch up this cloak and stick,
stuff these other things into my pocket, step out of a door in
this cavern, which opens on the river, where there is a steam-tug
already waiting for me, and then--then--oh, the wild joy of being
Thursday!" And he clasped his hands.

Syme, who had sat down once more with his usual insolent languor,
got to his feet with an unusual air of hesitation.

"Why is it," he asked vaguely, "that I think you are quite a decent
fellow? Why do I positively like you, Gregory?" He paused a moment,
and then added with a sort of fresh curiosity, "Is it because you
are such an ass?"

There was a thoughtful silence again, and then he cried out--

"Well, damn it all! this is the funniest situation I have ever been
in in my life, and I am going to act accordingly. Gregory, I gave
you a promise before I came into this place. That promise I would
keep under red-hot pincers. Would you give me, for my own safety, a
little promise of the same kind? "

"A promise?" asked Gregory, wondering.

"Yes," said Syme very seriously, "a promise. I swore before God
that I would not tell your secret to the police. Will you swear by
Humanity, or whatever beastly thing you believe in, that you will
not tell my secret to the anarchists?"

"Your secret?" asked the staring Gregory. "Have you got a secret?"

"Yes," said Syme, "I have a secret." Then after a pause, "Will you
swear?"

Gregory glared at him gravely for a few moments, and then said
abruptly--

"You must have bewitched me, but I feel a furious curiosity about
you. Yes, I will swear not to tell the anarchists anything you tell
me. But look sharp, for they will be here in a couple of minutes."

Syme rose slowly to his feet and thrust his long, white hands into
his long, grey trousers' pockets. Almost as he did so there came
five knocks on the outer grating, proclaiming the arrival of the
first of the conspirators.

"Well," said Syme slowly, "I don't know how to tell you the truth
more shortly than by saying that your expedient of dressing up as
an aimless poet is not confined to you or your President. We have
known the dodge for some time at Scotland Yard."

Gregory tried to spring up straight, but he swayed thrice.

"What do you say?" he asked in an inhuman voice.

"Yes," said Syme simply, "I am a police detective. But I think I
hear your friends coming."

From the doorway there came a murmur of "Mr. Joseph Chamberlain."
It was repeated twice and thrice, and then thirty times, and the
crowd of Joseph Chamberlains (a solemn thought) could be heard
trampling down the corridor.



CHAPTER III

THE MAN WHO WAS THURSDAY

BEFORE one of the fresh faces could appear at the doorway,
Gregory's stunned surprise had fallen from him. He was beside the
table with a bound, and a noise in his throat like a wild beast.
He caught up the Colt's revolver and took aim at Syme. Syme did
not flinch, but he put up a pale and polite hand.

"Don't be such a silly man," he said, with the effeminate dignity
of a curate. "Don't you see it's not necessary? Don't you see that
we're both in the same boat? Yes, and jolly sea-sick."

Gregory could not speak, but he could not fire either, and he
looked his question.

"Don't you see we've checkmated each other?" cried Syme. "I can't
tell the police you are an anarchist. You can't tell the anarchists
I'm a policeman. I can only watch you, knowing what you are; you
can only watch me, knowing what I am. In short, it's a lonely,
intellectual duel, my head against yours. I'm a policeman deprived
of the help of the police. You, my poor fellow, are an anarchist
deprived of the help of that law and organisation which is so
essential to anarchy. The one solitary difference is in your
favour. You are not surrounded by inquisitive policemen; I am
surrounded by inquisitive anarchists. I cannot betray you, but I
might betray myself. Come, come! wait and see me betray myself. I
shall do it so nicely."

Gregory put the pistol slowly down, still staring at Syme as if he
were a sea-monster.

"I don't believe in immortality," he said at last, "but if, after
all this, you were to break your word, God would make a hell only
for you, to howl in for ever."

"I shall not break my word," said Syme sternly, "nor will you
break yours. Here are your friends."

The mass of the anarchists entered the room heavily, with a
slouching and somewhat weary gait; but one little man, with a
black beard and glasses--a man somewhat of the type of Mr. Tim
Healy--detached himself, and bustled forward with some papers
in his hand.

"Comrade Gregory," he said, "I suppose this man is a delegate?"

Gregory, taken by surprise, looked down and muttered the name of
Syme; but Syme replied almost pertly--

"I am glad to see that your gate is well enough guarded to make it
hard for anyone to be here who was not a delegate."

The brow of the little man with the black beard was, however, still
contracted with something like suspicion.

"What branch do you represent?" he asked sharply.

"I should hardly call it a branch," said Syme, laughing; "I should
call it at the very least a root."

"What do you mean?"

"The fact is," said Syme serenely, "the truth is I am a
Sabbatarian. I have been specially sent here to see that you show
a due observance of Sunday."

The little man dropped one of his papers, and a flicker of fear
went over all the faces of the group. Evidently the awful
President, whose name was Sunday, did sometimes send down such
irregular ambassadors to such branch meetings.

"Well, comrade," said the man with the papers after a pause, "I
suppose we'd better give you a seat in the meeting?"

"If you ask my advice as a friend," said Syme with severe
benevolence, "I think you'd better."

When Gregory heard the dangerous dialogue end, with a sudden safety
for his rival, he rose abruptly and paced the floor in painful
thought. He was, indeed, in an agony of diplomacy. It was clear
that Syme's inspired impudence was likely to bring him out of all
merely accidental dilemmas. Little was to be hoped from them. He
could not himself betray Syme, partly from honour, but partly also
because, if he betrayed him and for some reason failed to destroy
him, the Syme who escaped would be a Syme freed from all obligation
of secrecy, a Syme who would simply walk to the nearest police
station. After all, it was only one night's discussion, and only
one detective who would know of it. He would let out as little as
possible of their plans that night, and then let Syme go, and
chance it.

He strode across to the group of anarchists, which was already
distributing itself along the benches.

"I think it is time we began," he said; "the steam-tug is waiting
on the river already. I move that Comrade Buttons takes the chair."

This being approved by a show of hands, the little man with the
papers slipped into the presidential seat.

"Comrades," he began, as sharp as a pistol-shot, "our meeting
tonight is important, though it need not be long. This branch
has always had the honour of electing Thursdays for the Central
European Council. We have elected many and splendid Thursdays. We
all lament the sad decease of the heroic worker who occupied the
post until last week. As you know, his services to the cause were
considerable. He organised the great dynamite coup of Brighton
which, under happier circumstances, ought to have killed everybody
on the pier. As you also know, his death was as self-denying as
his life, for he died through his faith in a hygienic mixture of
chalk and water as a substitute for milk, which beverage he
regarded as barbaric, and as involving cruelty to the cow.
Cruelty, or anything approaching to cruelty, revolted him always.
But it is not to acclaim his virtues that we are met, but for a
harder task. It is difficult properly to praise his qualities, but
it is more difficult to replace them. Upon you, comrades, it
devolves this evening to choose out of the company present the man
who shall be Thursday. If any comrade suggests a name I will put
it to the vote. If no comrade suggests a name, I can only tell
myself that that dear dynamiter, who is gone from us, has carried
into the unknowable abysses the last secret of his virtue and his
innocence."

There was a stir of almost inaudible applause, such as is sometimes
heard in church. Then a large old man, with a long and venerable
white beard, perhaps the only real working-man present, rose
lumberingly and said--

"I move that Comrade Gregory be elected Thursday," and sat
lumberingly down again.

"Does anyone second?" asked the chairman.

A little man with a velvet coat and pointed beard seconded.

"Before I put the matter to the vote," said the chairman, "I will
call on Comrade Gregory to make a statement."

Gregory rose amid a great rumble of applause. His face was deadly
pale, so that by contrast his queer red hair looked almost scarlet.
But he was smiling and altogether at ease. He had made up his mind,
and he saw his best policy quite plain in front of him like a white
road. His best chance was to make a softened and ambiguous speech,
such as would leave on the detective's mind the impression that the
anarchist brotherhood was a very mild affair after all. He believed
in his own literary power, his capacity for suggesting fine shades
and picking perfect words. He thought that with care he could
succeed, in spite of all the people around him, in conveying an
impression of the institution, subtly and delicately false. Syme
had once thought that anarchists, under all their bravado, were
only playing the fool. Could he not now, in the hour of peril, make
Syme think so again?

"Comrades," began Gregory, in a low but penetrating voice, "it is
not necessary for me to tell you what is my policy, for it is your
policy also. Our belief has been slandered, it has been disfigured,
it has been utterly confused and concealed, but it has never been
altered. Those who talk about anarchism and its dangers go
everywhere and anywhere to get their information, except to us,
except to the fountain head. They learn about anarchists from
sixpenny novels; they learn about anarchists from tradesmen's
newspapers; they learn about anarchists from Ally Sloper's
Half-Holiday and the Sporting Times. They never learn about
anarchists from anarchists. We have no chance of denying the
mountainous slanders which are heaped upon our heads from one end
of Europe to another. The man who has always heard that we are
walking plagues has never heard our reply. I know that he will not
hear it tonight, though my passion were to rend the roof. For it is
deep, deep under the earth that the persecuted are permitted to
assemble, as the Christians assembled in the Catacombs. But if, by
some incredible accident, there were here tonight a man who all his
life had thus immensely misunderstood us, I would put this question
to him: 'When those Christians met in those Catacombs, what sort of
moral reputation had they in the streets above? What tales were
told of their atrocities by one educated Roman to another? Suppose'
(I would say to him), 'suppose that we are only repeating that
still mysterious paradox of history. Suppose we seem as shocking as
the Christians because we are really as harmless as the Christians.
Suppose we seem as mad as the Christians because we are really as
meek."'

The applause that had greeted the opening sentences had been
gradually growing fainter, and at the last word it stopped
suddenly. In the abrupt silence, the man with the velvet jacket
said, in a high, squeaky voice--

"I'm not meek!"

"Comrade Witherspoon tells us," resumed Gregory, "that he is not
meek. Ah, how little he knows himself! His words are, indeed,
extravagant; his appearance is ferocious, and even (to an ordinary
taste) unattractive. But only the eye of a friendship as deep and
delicate as mine can perceive the deep foundation of solid meekness
which lies at the base of him, too deep even for himself to see. I
repeat, we are the true early Christians, only that we come too
late. We are simple, as they revere simple--look at Comrade
Witherspoon. We are modest, as they were modest--look at me. We are
merciful--"

"No, no!" called out Mr. Witherspoon with the velvet jacket.

"I say we are merciful," repeated Gregory furiously, "as the early
Christians were merciful. Yet this did not prevent their being
accused of eating human flesh. We do not eat human flesh--"

"Shame!" cried Witherspoon. "Why not?"

"Comrade Witherspoon," said Gregory, with a feverish gaiety, "is
anxious to know why nobody eats him (laughter). In our society, at
any rate, which loves him sincerely, which is founded upon love--"

"No, no!" said Witherspoon, "down with love."

"Which is founded upon love," repeated Gregory, grinding his teeth,
"there will be no difficulty about the aims which we shall pursue
as a body, or which I should pursue were I chosen as the
representative of that body. Superbly careless of the slanders that
represent us as assassins and enemies of human society, we shall
pursue with moral courage and quiet intellectual pressure, the
permanent ideals of brotherhood and simplicity."

Gregory resumed his seat and passed his hand across his forehead.
The silence was sudden and awkward, but the chairman rose like an
automaton, and said in a colourless voice--

"Does anyone oppose the election of Comrade Gregory?"

The assembly seemed vague and sub-consciously disappointed, and
Comrade Witherspoon moved restlessly on his seat and muttered in
his thick beard. By the sheer rush of routine, however, the motion
would have been put and carried. But as the chairman was opening
his mouth to put it, Syme sprang to his feet and said in a small
and quiet voice--

"Yes, Mr. Chairman, I oppose."

The most effective fact in oratory is an unexpected change in the
voice. Mr. Gabriel Syme evidently understood oratory. Having said
these first formal words in a moderated tone and with a brief
simplicity, he made his next word ring and volley in the vault as
if one of the guns had gone off.

"Comrades!" he cried, in a voice that made every man jump out of
his boots, "have we come here for this? Do we live underground like
rats in order to listen to talk like this? This is talk we might
listen to while eating buns at a Sunday School treat. Do we line
these walls with weapons and bar that door with death lest anyone
should come and hear Comrade Gregory saying to us, 'Be good, and
you will be happy,' 'Honesty is the best policy,' and 'Virtue is
its own reward'? There was not a word in Comrade Gregory's address
to which a curate could not have listened with pleasure (hear,
hear). But I am not a curate (loud cheers), and I did not listen to
it with pleasure (renewed cheers). The man who is fitted to make a
good curate is not fitted to make a resolute, forcible, and
efficient Thursday (hear, hear)."

"Comrade Gregory has told us, in only too apologetic a tone, that
we are not the enemies of society. But I say that we are the
enemies of society, and so much the worse for society. We are the
enemies of society, for society is the enemy of humanity, its
oldest and its most pitiless enemy (hear, hear). Comrade Gregory
has told us (apologetically again) that we are not murderers. There
I agree. We are not murderers, we are executioners (cheers)."

Ever since Syme had risen Gregory had sat staring at him, his face
idiotic with astonishment. Now in the pause his lips of clay
parted, and he said, with an automatic and lifeless distinctness--

"You damnable hypocrite!"

Syme looked straight into those frightful eyes with his own pale
blue ones, and said with dignity--

"Comrade Gregory accuses me of hypocrisy. He knows as well as I do
that I am keeping all my engagements and doing nothing but my duty.
I do not mince words. I do not pretend to. I say that Comrade
Gregory is unfit to be Thursday for all his amiable qualities. He
is unfit to be Thursday because of his amiable qualities. We do not
want the Supreme Council of Anarchy infected with a maudlin mercy
(hear, hear). This is no time for ceremonial politeness, neither is
it a time for ceremonial modesty. I set myself against Comrade
Gregory as I would set myself against all the Governments of
Europe, because the anarchist who has given himself to anarchy has
forgotten modesty as much as he has forgotten pride (cheers). I am
not a man at all. I am a cause (renewed cheers). I set myself
against Comrade Gregory as impersonally and as calmly as I should
choose one pistol rather than another out of that rack upon the
wall; and I say that rather than have Gregory and his
milk-and-water methods on the Supreme Council, I would offer myself
for election--"

His sentence was drowned in a deafening cataract of applause. The
faces, that had grown fiercer and fiercer with approval as his
tirade grew more and more uncompromising, were now distorted with
grins of anticipation or cloven with delighted cries. At the
moment when he announced himself as ready to stand for the post of
Thursday, a roar of excitement and assent broke forth, and became
uncontrollable, and at the same moment Gregory sprang to his feet,
with foam upon his mouth, and shouted against the shouting.

"Stop, you blasted madmen!" he cried, at the top of a voice that
tore his throat. "Stop, you--"

But louder than Gregory's shouting and louder than the roar of the
room came the voice of Syme, still speaking in a peal of pitiless
thunder--

"I do not go to the Council to rebut that slander that calls us
murderers; I go to earn it (loud and prolonged cheering). To the
priest who says these men are the enemies of religion, to the
judge who says these men are the enemies of law, to the fat
parliamentarian who says these men are the enemies of order and
public decency, to all these I will reply, 'You are false kings,
but you are true prophets. I am come to destroy you, and to fulfil
your prophecies.'"

The heavy clamour gradually died away, but before it had ceased
Witherspoon had jumped to his feet, his hair and beard all on end,
and had said--

"I move, as an amendment, that Comrade Syme be appointed to the post."

"Stop all this, I tell you!" cried Gregory, with frantic face and
hands. "Stop it, it is all--"

The voice of the chairman clove his speech with a cold accent.

"Does anyone second this amendment?" he said. A tall, tired man,
with melancholy eyes and an American chin beard, was observed on
the back bench to be slowly rising to his feet. Gregory had been
screaming for some time past; now there was a change in his accent,
more shocking than any scream. "I end all this!" he said, in a
voice as heavy as stone.

"This man cannot be elected. He is a--"

"Yes," said Syme, quite motionless, "what is he?" Gregory's mouth
worked twice without sound; then slowly the blood began to crawl
back into his dead face. "He is a man quite inexperienced in our
work," he said, and sat down abruptly.

Before he had done so, the long, lean man with the American beard
was again upon his feet, and was repeating in a high American
monotone--

"I beg to second the election of Comrade Syme."

"The amendment will, as usual, be put first," said Mr. Buttons, the
chairman, with mechanical rapidity.

"The question is that Comrade Syme--"

Gregory had again sprung to his feet, panting and passionate.

"Comrades," he cried out, "I am not a madman."

"Oh, oh!" said Mr. Witherspoon.

"I am not a madman," reiterated Gregory, with a frightful sincerity
which for a moment staggered the room, "but I give you a counsel
which you can call mad if you like. No, I will not call it a
counsel, for I can give you no reason for it. I will call it a
command. Call it a mad command, but act upon it. Strike, but hear
me! Kill me, but obey me! Do not elect this man." Truth is so
terrible, even in fetters, that for a moment Syme's slender and
insane victory swayed like a reed. But you could not have guessed
it from Syme's bleak blue eyes. He merely began--

"Comrade Gregory commands--"

Then the spell was snapped, and one anarchist called out to Gregory--

"Who are you? You are not Sunday"; and another anarchist added in a
heavier voice, "And you are not Thursday."

"Comrades," cried Gregory, in a voice like that of a martyr who in
an ecstacy of pain has passed beyond pain, "it is nothing to me
whether you detest me as a tyrant or detest me as a slave. If you
will not take my command, accept my degradation. I kneel to you. I
throw myself at your feet. I implore you. Do not elect this man."

"Comrade Gregory," said the chairman after a painful pause, "this
is really not quite dignified."

For the first time in the proceedings there was for a few seconds a
real silence. Then Gregory fell back in his seat, a pale wreck of a
man, and the chairman repeated, like a piece of clock-work suddenly
started again--

"The question is that Comrade Syme be elected to the post of
Thursday on the General Council."

The roar rose like the sea, the hands rose like a forest, and three
minutes afterwards Mr. Gabriel Syme, of the Secret Police Service,
was elected to the post of Thursday on the General Council of the
Anarchists of Europe.

Everyone in the room seemed to feel the tug waiting on the river,
the sword-stick and the revolver, waiting on the table. The instant
the election was ended and irrevocable, and Syme had received the
paper proving his election, they all sprang to their feet, and the
fiery groups moved and mixed in the room. Syme found himself,
somehow or other, face to face with Gregory, who still regarded him
with a stare of stunned hatred. They were silent for many minutes.

"You are a devil!" said Gregory at last.

"And you are a gentleman," said Syme with gravity.

"It was you that entrapped me," began Gregory, shaking from head
to foot, "entrapped me into--"

"Talk sense," said Syme shortly. "Into what sort of devils'
parliament have you entrapped me, if it comes to that? You made me
swear before I made you. Perhaps we are both doing what we think
right. But what we think right is so damned different that there
can be nothing between us in the way of concession. There is
nothing possible between us but honour and death," and he pulled
the great cloak about his shoulders and picked up the flask from
the table.

"The boat is quite ready," said Mr. Buttons, bustling up. "Be good
enough to step this way."

With a gesture that revealed the shop-walker, he led Syme down a
short, iron-bound passage, the still agonised Gregory following
feverishly at their heels. At the end of the passage was a door,
which Buttons opened sharply, showing a sudden blue and silver
picture of the moonlit river, that looked like a scene in a
theatre. Close to the opening lay a dark, dwarfish steam-launch,
like a baby dragon with one red eye.

Almost in the act of stepping on board, Gabriel Syme turned to the
gaping Gregory.

"You have kept your word," he said gently, with his face in shadow.
"You are a man of honour, and I thank you. You have kept it even
down to a small particular. There was one special thing you
promised me at the beginning of the affair, and which you have
certainly given me by the end of it."

"What do you mean?" cried the chaotic Gregory. "What did I promise
you?"

"A very entertaining evening," said Syme, and he made a military
salute with the sword-stick as the steamboat slid away.



CHAPTER IV

THE TALE OF A DETECTIVE

GABRIEL SYME was not merely a detective who pretended to be a poet;
he was really a poet who had become a detective. Nor was his hatred
of anarchy hypocritical. He was one of those who are driven early
in life into too conservative an attitude by the bewildering folly
of most revolutionists. He had not attained it by any tame
tradition. His respectability was spontaneous and sudden, a
rebellion against rebellion. He came of a family of cranks, in
which all the oldest people had all the newest notions. One of his
uncles always walked about without a hat, and another had made an
unsuccessful attempt to walk about with a hat and nothing else. His
father cultivated art and self-realisation; his mother went in for
simplicity and hygiene. Hence the child, during his tenderer years,
was wholly unacquainted with any drink between the extremes of
absinth and cocoa, of both of which he had a healthy dislike. The
more his mother preached a more than Puritan abstinence the more
did his father expand into a more than pagan latitude; and by the
time the former had come to enforcing vegetarianism, the latter had
pretty well reached the point of defending cannibalism.

Being surrounded with every conceivable kind of revolt from
infancy, Gabriel had to revolt into something, so he revolted into
the only thing left--sanity. But there was just enough in him of
the blood of these fanatics to make even his protest for common
sense a little too fierce to be sensible. His hatred of modern
lawlessness had been crowned also by an accident. It happened that
he was walking in a side street at the instant of a dynamite
outrage. He had been blind and deaf for a moment, and then seen,
the smoke clearing, the broken windows and the bleeding faces.
After that he went about as usual--quiet, courteous, rather gentle;
but there was a spot on his mind that was not sane. He did not
regard anarchists, as most of us do, as a handful of morbid men,
combining ignorance with intellectualism. He regarded them as a
huge and pitiless peril, like a Chinese invasion.

He poured perpetually into newspapers and their waste-paper baskets
a torrent of tales, verses and violent articles, warning men of
this deluge of barbaric denial. But he seemed to be getting no
nearer his enemy, and, what was worse, no nearer a living. As he
paced the Thames embankment, bitterly biting a cheap cigar and
brooding on the advance of Anarchy, there was no anarchist with
a bomb in his pocket so savage or so solitary as he. Indeed, he
always felt that Government stood alone and desperate, with its
back to the wall. He was too quixotic to have cared for it
otherwise.

He walked on the Embankment once under a dark red sunset. The red
river reflected the red sky, and they both reflected his anger. The
sky, indeed, was so swarthy, and the light on the river relatively
so lurid, that the water almost seemed of fiercer flame than the
sunset it mirrored. It looked like a stream of literal fire winding
under the vast caverns of a subterranean country.

Syme was shabby in those days. He wore an old-fashioned black
chimney-pot hat; he was wrapped in a yet more old-fashioned cloak,
black and ragged; and the combination gave him the look of the
early villains in Dickens and Bulwer Lytton. Also his yellow beard
and hair were more unkempt and leonine than when they appeared long
afterwards, cut and pointed, on the lawns of Saffron Park. A long,
lean, black cigar, bought in Soho for twopence, stood out from
between his tightened teeth, and altogether he looked a very
satisfactory specimen of the anarchists upon whom he had vowed a
holy war. Perhaps this was why a policeman on the Embankment spoke
to him, and said "Good evening."

Syme, at a crisis of his morbid fears for humanity, seemed stung by
the mere stolidity of the automatic official, a mere bulk of blue
in the twilight.

"A good evening is it?" he said sharply. "You fellows would call
the end of the world a good evening. Look at that bloody red sun
and that bloody river! I tell you that if that were literally human
blood, spilt and shining, you would still be standing here as solid
as ever, looking out for some poor harmless tramp whom you could
move on. You policemen are cruel to the poor, but I could forgive
you even your cruelty if it were not for your calm."

"If we are calm," replied the policeman, "it is the calm of
organised resistance."

"Eh?" said Syme, staring.

"The soldier must be calm in the thick of the battle," pursued the
policeman. "The composure of an army is the anger of a nation."

"Good God, the Board Schools!" said Syme. "Is this undenominational
education?"

"No," said the policeman sadly, "I never had any of those
advantages. The Board Schools came after my time. What education
I had was very rough and old-fashioned, I am afraid."

"Where did you have it?" asked Syme, wondering.

"Oh, at Harrow," said the policeman

The class sympathies which, false as they are, are the truest
things in so many men, broke out of Syme before he could control
them.

"But, good Lord, man," he said, "you oughtn't to be a policeman!"

The policeman sighed and shook his head.

"I know," he said solemnly, "I know I am not worthy."

"But why did you join the police?" asked Syme with rude curiosity.

"For much the same reason that you abused the police," replied the
other. "I found that there was a special opening in the service for
those whose fears for humanity were concerned rather with the
aberrations of the scientific intellect than with the normal and
excusable, though excessive, outbreaks of the human will. I trust
I make myself clear."

"If you mean that you make your opinion clear," said Syme, "I
suppose you do. But as for making yourself clear, it is the last
thing you do. How comes a man like you to be talking philosophy
in a blue helmet on the Thames embankment?

"You have evidently not heard of the latest development in our
police system," replied the other. "I am not surprised at it. We
are keeping it rather dark from the educated class, because that
class contains most of our enemies. But you seem to be exactly in
the right frame of mind. I think you might almost join us."

"Join you in what?" asked Syme.

"I will tell you," said the policeman slowly. "This is the
situation: The head of one of our departments, one of the most
celebrated detectives in Europe, has long been of opinion that a
purely intellectual conspiracy would soon threaten the very
existence of civilisation. He is certain that the scientific and
artistic worlds are silently bound in a crusade against the Family
and the State. He has, therefore, formed a special corps of
policemen, policemen who are also philosophers. It is their
business to watch the beginnings of this conspiracy, not merely in
a criminal but in a controversial sense. I am a democrat myself,
and I am fully aware of the value of the ordinary man in matters of
ordinary valour or virtue. But it would obviously be undesirable to
employ the common policeman in an investigation which is also a
heresy hunt."

Syme's eyes were bright with a sympathetic curiosity.

"What do you do, then?" he said.

"The work of the philosophical policeman," replied the man in
blue, "is at once bolder and more subtle than that of the ordinary
detective. The ordinary detective goes to pot-houses to arrest
thieves; we go to artistic tea-parties to detect pessimists. The
ordinary detective discovers from a ledger or a diary that a crime
has been committed. We discover from a book of sonnets that a crime
will be committed. We have to trace the origin of those dreadful
thoughts that drive men on at last to intellectual fanaticism and
intellectual crime. We were only just in time to prevent the
assassination at Hartle pool, and that was entirely due to the fact
that our Mr. Wilks (a smart young fellow) thoroughly understood a
triolet."

"Do you mean," asked Syme, "that there is really as much connection
between crime and the modern intellect as all that?"

"You are not sufficiently democratic," answered the policeman, "but
you were right when you said just now that our ordinary treatment
of the poor criminal was a pretty brutal business. I tell you I am
sometimes sick of my trade when I see how perpetually it means
merely a war upon the ignorant and the desperate. But this new
movement of ours is a very different affair. We deny the snobbish
English assumption that the uneducated are the dangerous criminals.
We remember the Roman Emperors. We remember the great poisoning
princes of the Renaissance. We say that the dangerous criminal is
the educated criminal. We say that the most dangerous criminal now
is the entirely lawless modern philosopher. Compared to him,
burglars and bigamists are essentially moral men; my heart goes out
to them. They accept the essential ideal of man; they merely seek
it wrongly. Thieves respect property. They merely wish the property
to become their property that they may more perfectly respect it.
But philosophers dislike property as property; they wish to destroy
the very idea of personal possession. Bigamists respect marriage,
or they would not go through the highly ceremonial and even
ritualistic formality of bigamy. But philosophers despise marriage
as marriage. Murderers respect human life; they merely wish to
attain a greater fulness of human life in themselves by the
sacrifice of what seems to them to be lesser lives. But
philosophers hate life itself, their own as much as other
people's."

Syme struck his hands together.

"How true that is," he cried. "I have felt it from my boyhood, but
never could state the verbal antithesis. The common criminal is a
bad man, but at least he is, as it were, a conditional good man.
He says that if only a certain obstacle be removed--say a wealthy
uncle--he is then prepared to accept the universe and to praise
God. He is a reformer, but not an anarchist. He wishes to cleanse
the edifice, but not to destroy it. But the evil philosopher is
not trying to alter things, but to annihilate them. Yes, the
modern world has retained all those parts of police work which are
really oppressive and ignominious, the harrying of the poor, the
spying upon the unfortunate. It has given up its more dignified
work, the punishment of powerful traitors the in the State and
powerful heresiarchs in the Church. The moderns say we must not
punish heretics. My only doubt is whether we have a right to
punish anybody else."

"But this is absurd!" cried the policeman, clasping his hands with
an excitement uncommon in persons of his figure and costume, "but
it is intolerable! I don't know what you're doing, but you're
wasting your life. You must, you shall, join our special army
against anarchy. Their armies are on our frontiers. Their bolt
is ready to fall. A moment more, and you may lose the glory of
working with us, perhaps the glory of dying with the last heroes
of the world."

"It is a chance not to be missed, certainly," assented Syme, "but
still I do not quite understand. I know as well as anybody that
the modern world is full of lawless little men and mad little
movements. But, beastly as they are, they generally have the one
merit of disagreeing with each other. How can you talk of their
leading one army or hurling one bolt. What is this anarchy?"

"Do not confuse it," replied the constable, "with those chance
dynamite outbreaks from Russia or from Ireland, which are really
the outbreaks of oppressed, if mistaken, men. This is a vast
philosophic movement, consisting of an outer and an inner ring.
You might even call the outer ring the laity and the inner ring
the priesthood. I prefer to call the outer ring the innocent
section, the inner ring the supremely guilty section. The outer
ring--the main mass of their supporters--are merely anarchists;
that is, men who believe that rules and formulas have destroyed
human happiness. They believe that all the evil results of human
crime are the results of the system that has called it crime. They
do not believe that the crime creates the punishment. They believe
that the punishment has created the crime. They believe that if a
man seduced seven women he would naturally walk away as blameless
as the flowers of spring. They believe that if a man picked a
pocket he would naturally feel exquisitely good. These I call the
innocent section."

"Oh!" said Syme.

"Naturally, therefore, these people talk about 'a happy time
coming'; 'the paradise of the future'; 'mankind freed from the
bondage of vice and the bondage of virtue,' and so on. And so also
the men of the inner circle speak--the sacred priesthood. They
also speak to applauding crowds of the happiness of the future,
and of mankind freed at last. But in their mouths"--and the
policeman lowered his voice--"in their mouths these happy phrases
have a horrible meaning. They are under no illusions; they are too
intellectual to think that man upon this earth can ever be quite
free of original sin and the struggle. And they mean death. When
they say that mankind shall be free at last, they mean that
mankind shall commit suicide. When they talk of a paradise without
right or wrong, they mean the grave.

They have but two objects, to destroy first humanity and then
themselves. That is why they throw bombs instead of firing pistols.
The innocent rank and file are disappointed because the bomb has
not killed the king; but the high-priesthood are happy because it
has killed somebody."

"How can I join you?" asked Syme, with a sort of passion.

"I know for a fact that there is a vacancy at the moment," said the
policeman, "as I have the honour to be somewhat in the confidence
of the chief of whom I have spoken. You should really come and see
him. Or rather, I should not say see him, nobody ever sees him; but
you can talk to him if you like."

"Telephone?" inquired Syme, with interest.

"No," said the policeman placidly, "he has a fancy for always
sitting in a pitch-dark room. He says it makes his thoughts
brighter. Do come along."

Somewhat dazed and considerably excited, Syme allowed himself to be
led to a side-door in the long row of buildings of Scotland Yard.
Almost before he knew what he was doing, he had been passed through
the hands of about four intermediate officials, and was suddenly
shown into a room, the abrupt blackness of which startled him like
a blaze of light. It was not the ordinary darkness, in which forms
can be faintly traced; it was like going suddenly stone-blind.

"Are you the new recruit?" asked a heavy voice.

And in some strange way, though there was not the shadow of a shape
in the gloom, Syme knew two things: first, that it came from a man
of massive stature; and second, that the man had his back to him.

"Are you the new recruit?" said the invisible chief, who seemed to
have heard all about it. "All right. You are engaged."

Syme, quite swept off his feet, made a feeble fight against this
irrevocable phrase.

"I really have no experience," he began.

"No one has any experience," said the other, "of the Battle of
Armageddon."

"But I am really unfit--"

"You are willing, that is enough," said the unknown.

"Well, really," said Syme, "I don't know any profession of which
mere willingness is the final test."

"I do," said the other--"martyrs. I am condemning you to death.
Good day."

Thus it was that when Gabriel Syme came out again into the crimson
light of evening, in his shabby black hat and shabby, lawless
cloak, he came out a member of the New Detective Corps for the
frustration of the great conspiracy. Acting under the advice of his
friend the policeman (who was professionally inclined to neatness),
he trimmed his hair and beard, bought a good hat, clad himself in
an exquisite summer suit of light blue-grey, with a pale yellow
flower in the button-hole, and, in short, became that elegant and
rather insupportable person whom Gregory had first encountered in
the little garden of Saffron Park. Before he finally left the
police premises his friend provided him with a small blue card,
on which was written, "The Last Crusade," and a number, the sign
of his official authority. He put this carefully in his upper
waistcoat pocket, lit a cigarette, and went forth to track and
fight the enemy in all the drawing-rooms of London. Where his
adventure ultimately led him we have already seen. At about
half-past one on a February night he found himself steaming in a
small tug up the silent Thames, armed with swordstick and revolver,
the duly elected Thursday of the Central Council of Anarchists.

When Syme stepped out on to the steam-tug he had a singular
sensation of stepping out into something entirely new; not merely
into the landscape of a new land, but even into the landscape of a
new planet. This was mainly due to the insane yet solid decision of
that evening, though partly also to an entire change in the weather
and the sky since he entered the little tavern some two hours
before. Every trace of the passionate plumage of the cloudy sunset
had been swept away, and a naked moon stood in a naked sky. The
moon was so strong and full that (by a paradox often to be noticed)
it seemed like a weaker sun. It gave, not the sense of bright
moonshine, but rather of a dead daylight.

Over the whole landscape lay a luminous and unnatural
discoloration, as of that disastrous twilight which Milton spoke
of as shed by the sun in eclipse; so that Syme fell easily into
his first thought, that he was actually on some other and emptier
planet, which circled round some sadder star. But the more he felt
this glittering desolation in the moonlit land, the more his own
chivalric folly glowed in the night like a great fire. Even the
common things he carried with him--the food and the brandy and the
loaded pistol--took on exactly that concrete and material poetry
which a child feels when he takes a gun upon a journey or a bun
with him to bed. The sword-stick and the brandy-flask, though in
themselves only the tools of morbid conspirators, became the
expressions of his own more healthy romance. The sword-stick
became almost the sword of chivalry, and the brandy the wine of
the stirrup-cup. For even the most dehumanised modern fantasies
depend on some older and simpler figure; the adventures may be
mad, but the adventurer must be sane. The dragon without St.
George would not even be grotesque. So this inhuman landscape was
only imaginative by the presence of a man really human. To Syme's
exaggerative mind the bright, bleak houses and terraces by the
Thames looked as empty as the mountains of the moon. But even the
moon is only poetical because there is a man in the moon.

The tug was worked by two men, and with much toil went
comparatively slowly. The clear moon that had lit up Chiswick had
gone down by the time that they passed Battersea, and when they
came under the enormous bulk of Westminster day had already begun
to break. It broke like the splitting of great bars of lead,
showing bars of silver; and these had brightened like white fire
when the tug, changing its onward course, turned inward to a large
landing stage rather beyond Charing Cross.

The great stones of the Embankment seemed equally dark and gigantic
as Syme looked up at them. They were big and black against the huge
white dawn. They made him feel that he was landing on the colossal
steps of some Egyptian palace; and, indeed, the thing suited his
mood, for he was, in his own mind, mounting to attack the solid
thrones of horrible and heathen kings. He leapt out of the boat on
to one slimy step, and stood, a dark and slender figure, amid the
enormous masonry. The two men in the tug put her off again and
turned up stream. They had never spoken a word.



CHAPTER V

THE FEAST OF FEAR

AT first the large stone stair seemed to Syme as deserted as a
pyramid; but before he reached the top he had realised that there
was a man leaning over the parapet of the Embankment and looking
out across the river. As a figure he was quite conventional, clad
in a silk hat and frock-coat of the more formal type of fashion;
he had a red flower in his buttonhole. As Syme drew nearer to him
step by step, he did not even move a hair; and Syme could come
close enough to notice even in the dim, pale morning light that
his face was long, pale and intellectual, and ended in a small
triangular tuft of dark beard at the very point of the chin, all
else being clean-shaven. This scrap of hair almost seemed a mere
oversight; the rest of the face was of the type that is best
shaven--clear-cut, ascetic, and in its way noble. Syme drew closer
and closer, noting all this, and still the figure did not stir.

At first an instinct had told Syme that this was the man whom he
was meant to meet. Then, seeing that the man made no sign, he had
concluded that he was not. And now again he had come back to a
certainty that the man had something to do with his mad adventure.
For the man remained more still than would have been natural if a
stranger had come so close. He was as motionless as a wax-work,
and got on the nerves somewhat in the same way. Syme looked again
and again at the pale, dignified and delicate face, and the face
still looked blankly across the river. Then he took out of his
pocket the note from Buttons proving his election, and put it
before that sad and beautiful face. Then the man smiled, and his
smile was a shock, for it was all on one side, going up in the
right cheek and down in the left.

There was nothing, rationally speaking, to scare anyone about
this. Many people have this nervous trick of a crooked smile, and
in many it is even attractive. But in all Syme's circumstances,
with the dark dawn and the deadly errand and the loneliness on the
great dripping stones, there was something unnerving in it.

There was the silent river and the silent man, a man of even
classic face. And there was the last nightmare touch that his
smile suddenly went wrong.

The spasm of smile was instantaneous, and the man's face dropped
at once into its harmonious melancholy. He spoke without further
explanation or inquiry, like a man speaking to an old colleague.

"If we walk up towards Leicester Square," he said, "we shall just
be in time for breakfast. Sunday always insists on an early
breakfast. Have you had any sleep?"

"No," said Syme.

"Nor have I," answered the man in an ordinary tone. "I shall try to
get to bed after breakfast."

He spoke with casual civility, but in an utterly dead voice that
contradicted the fanaticism of his face. It seemed almost as if all
friendly words were to him lifeless conveniences, and that his only
life was hate. After a pause the man spoke again.

"Of course, the Secretary of the branch told you everything that
can be told. But the one thing that can never be told is the last
notion of the President, for his notions grow like a tropical
forest. So in case you don't know, I'd better tell you that he is
carrying out his notion of concealing ourselves by not concealing
ourselves to the most extraordinary lengths just now. Originally,
of course, we met in a cell underground, just as your branch does.
Then Sunday made us take a private room at an ordinary restaurant.
He said that if you didn't seem to be hiding nobody hunted you out.
Well, he is the only man on earth, I know; but sometimes I really
think that his huge brain is going a little mad in its old age. For
now we flaunt ourselves before the public. We have our breakfast on
a balcony--on a balcony, if you please--overlooking Leicester
Square."

"And what do the people say?" asked Syme.

"It's quite simple what they say," answered his guide.

"They say we are a lot of jolly gentlemen who pretend they are
anarchists."

"It seems to me a very clever idea," said Syme.

"Clever! God blast your impudence! Clever!" cried out the other in
a sudden, shrill voice which was as startling and discordant as his
crooked smile. "When you've seen Sunday for a split second you'll
leave off calling him clever."

With this they emerged out of a narrow street, and saw the early
sunlight filling Leicester Square. It will never be known, I
suppose, why this square itself should look so alien and in some
ways so continental. It will never be known whether it was the
foreign look that attracted the foreigners or the foreigners who
gave it the foreign look. But on this particular morning the effect
seemed singularly bright and clear. Between the open square and the
sunlit leaves and the statue and the Saracenic outlines of the
Alhambra, it looked the replica of some French or even Spanish
public place. And this effect increased in Syme the sensation,
which in many shapes he had had through the whole adventure, the
eerie sensation of having strayed into a new world. As a fact, he
had bought bad cigars round Leicester Square ever since he was a
boy. But as he turned that corner, and saw the trees and the
Moorish cupolas, he could have sworn that he was turning into an
unknown Place de something or other in some foreign town.

At one corner of the square there projected a kind of angle of a
prosperous but quiet hotel, the bulk of which belonged to a street
behind. In the wall there was one large French window, probably
the window of a large coffee-room; and outside this window, almost
literally overhanging the square, was a formidably buttressed
balcony, big enough to contain a dining-table. In fact, it did
contain a dining-table, or more strictly a breakfast-table; and
round the breakfast-table, glowing in the sunlight and evident to
the street, were a group of noisy and talkative men, all dressed
in the insolence of fashion, with white waistcoats and expensive
button-holes. Some of their jokes could almost be heard across the
square. Then the grave Secretary gave his unnatural smile, and Syme
knew that this boisterous breakfast party was the secret conclave
of the European Dynamiters.

Then, as Syme continued to stare at them, he saw something that he
had not seen before. He had not seen it literally because it was
too large to see. At the nearest end of the balcony, blocking up a
great part of the perspective, was the back of a great mountain of
a man. When Syme had seen him, his first thought was that the
weight of him must break down the balcony of stone. His vastness
did not lie only in the fact that he was abnormally tall and quite
incredibly fat. This man was planned enormously in his original
proportions, like a statue carved deliberately as colossal. His
head, crowned with white hair, as seen from behind looked bigger
than a head ought to be. The ears that stood out from it looked
larger than human ears. He was enlarged terribly to scale; and this
sense of size was so staggering, that when Syme saw him all the
other figures seemed quite suddenly to dwindle and become dwarfish.
They were still sitting there as before with their flowers and
frock-coats, but now it looked as if the big man was entertaining
five children to tea.

As Syme and the guide approached the side door of the hotel, a
waiter came out smiling with every tooth in his head.

"The gentlemen are up there, sare," he said. "They do talk and they
do laugh at what they talk. They do say they will throw bombs at ze
king."

And the waiter hurried away with a napkin over his arm, much
pleased with the singular frivolity of the gentlemen upstairs.

The two men mounted the stairs in silence.

Syme had never thought of asking whether the monstrous man who
almost filled and broke the balcony was the great President of whom
the others stood in awe. He knew it was so, with an unaccountable
but instantaneous certainty. Syme, indeed, was one of those men who
are open to all the more nameless psychological influences in a
degree a little dangerous to mental health. Utterly devoid of fear
in physical dangers, he was a great deal too sensitive to the smell
of spiritual evil. Twice already that night little unmeaning things
had peeped out at him almost pruriently, and given him a sense of
drawing nearer and nearer to the head-quarters of hell. And this
sense became overpowering as he drew nearer to the great President.

The form it took was a childish and yet hateful fancy. As he walked
across the inner room towards the balcony, the large face of Sunday
grew larger and larger; and Syme was gripped with a fear that when
he was quite close the face would be too big to be possible, and
that he would scream aloud. He remembered that as a child he would
not look at the mask of Memnon in the British Museum, because it
was a face, and so large.

By an effort, braver than that of leaping over a cliff, he went to
an empty seat at the breakfast-table and sat down. The men greeted
him with good-humoured raillery as if they had always known him. He
sobered himself a little by looking at their conventional coats and
solid, shining coffee-pot; then he looked again at Sunday. His face
was very large, but it was still possible to humanity.

In the presence of the President the whole company looked
sufficiently commonplace; nothing about them caught the eye at
first, except that by the President's caprice they had been dressed
up with a festive respectability, which gave the meal the look of a
wedding breakfast. One man indeed stood out at even a superficial
glance. He at least was the common or garden Dynamiter. He wore,
indeed, the high white collar and satin tie that were the uniform
of the occasion; but out of this collar there sprang a head quite
unmanageable and quite unmistakable, a bewildering bush of brown
hair and beard that almost obscured the eyes like those of a Skye
terrier. But the eyes did look out of the tangle, and they were the
sad eyes of some Russian serf. The effect of this figure was not
terrible like that of the President, but it had every diablerie
that can come from the utterly grotesque. If out of that stiff tie
and collar there had come abruptly the head of a cat or a dog, it
could not have been a more idiotic contrast.

The man's name, it seemed, was Gogol; he was a Pole, and in this
circle of days he was called Tuesday. His soul and speech were
incurably tragic; he could not force himself to play the
prosperous and frivolous part demanded of him by President Sunday.
And, indeed, when Syme came in the President, with that daring
disregard of public suspicion which was his policy, was actually
chaffing Gogol upon his inability to assume conventional graces.

"Our friend Tuesday," said the President in a deep voice at once
of quietude and volume, "our friend Tuesday doesn't seem to grasp
the idea. He dresses up like a gentleman, but he seems to be too
great a soul to behave like one. He insists on the ways of the
stage conspirator. Now if a gentleman goes about London in a top
hat and a frock-coat, no one need know that he is an anarchist.
But if a gentleman puts on a top hat and a frock-coat, and then
goes about on his hands and knees--well, he may attract attention.
That's what Brother Gogol does. He goes about on his hands and
knees with such inexhaustible diplomacy, that by this time he
finds it quite difficult to walk upright."

"I am not good at goncealment," said Gogol sulkily, with a thick
foreign accent; "I am not ashamed of the cause."

"Yes you are, my boy, and so is the cause of you," said the
President good-naturedly. "You hide as much as anybody; but you
can't do it, you see, you're such an ass! You try to combine two
inconsistent methods. When a householder finds a man under his
bed, he will probably pause to note the circumstance. But if he
finds a man under his bed in a top hat, you will agree with me, 
my dear Tuesday, that he is not likely even to forget it. Now
when you were found under Admiral Biffin's bed--"

"I am not good at deception," said Tuesday gloomily, flushing.

"Right, my boy, right," said the President with a ponderous
heartiness, "you aren't good at anything."

While this stream of conversation continued, Syme was looking
more steadily at the men around him. As he did so, he gradually
felt all his sense of something spiritually queer return.

He had thought at first that they were all of common stature and
costume, with the evident exception of the hairy Gogol. But as he
looked at the others, he began to see in each of them exactly what
he had seen in the man by the river, a demoniac detail somewhere.
That lop-sided laugh, which would suddenly disfigure the fine
face of his original guide, was typical of all these types. Each
man had something about him, perceived perhaps at the tenth or
twentieth glance, which was not normal, and which seemed hardly
human. The only metaphor he could think of was this, that they
all looked as men of fashion and presence would look, with the
additional twist given in a false and curved mirror.

Only the individual examples will express this half-concealed
eccentricity. Syme's original cicerone bore the title of Monday;
he was the Secretary of the Council, and his twisted smile was
regarded with more terror than anything, except the President's
horrible, happy laughter. But now that Syme had more space and
light to observe him, there were other touches. His fine face
was so emaciated, that Syme thought it must be wasted with some
disease; yet somehow the very distress of his dark eyes denied
this. It was no physical ill that troubled him. His eyes were
alive with intellectual torture, as if pure thought was pain.

He was typical of each of the tribe; each man was subtly and
differently wrong. Next to him sat Tuesday, the tousle-headed
Gogol, a man more obviously mad. Next was Wednesday, a certain
Marquis de St. Eustache, a sufficiently characteristic figure. The
first few glances found nothing unusual about him, except that he
was the only man at table who wore the fashionable clothes as if
they were really his own. He had a black French beard cut square
and a black English frock-coat cut even squarer. But Syme,
sensitive to such things, felt somehow that the man carried a rich
atmosphere with him, a rich atmosphere that suffocated. It
reminded one irrationally of drowsy odours and of dying lamps in
the darker poems of Byron and Poe. With this went a sense of his
being clad, not in lighter colours, but in softer materials; his
black seemed richer and warmer than the black shades about him, as
if it were compounded of profound colour. His black coat looked as
if it were only black by being too dense a purple. His black beard
looked as if it were only black by being too deep a blue. And in
the gloom and thickness of the beard his dark red mouth showed
sensual and scornful. Whatever he was he was not a Frenchman; he
might be a Jew; he might be something deeper yet in the dark heart
of the East. In the bright coloured Persian tiles and pictures
showing tyrants hunting, you may see just those almond eyes, those
blue-black beards, those cruel, crimson lips.

Then came Syme, and next a very old man, Professor de Worms, who
still kept the chair of Friday, though every day it was expected
that his death would leave it empty. Save for his intellect, he was
in the last dissolution of senile decay. His face was as grey as
his long grey beard, his forehead was lifted and fixed finally in a
furrow of mild despair. In no other case, not even that of Gogol,
did the bridegroom brilliancy of the morning dress express a more
painful contrast. For the red flower in his button-hole showed up
against a face that was literally discoloured like lead; the whole
hideous effect was as if some drunken dandies had put their clothes
upon a corpse. When he rose or sat down, which was with long labour
and peril, something worse was expressed than mere weakness,
something indefinably connected with the horror of the whole scene.
It did not express decrepitude merely, but corruption. Another
hateful fancy crossed Syme's quivering mind. He could not help
thinking that whenever the man moved a leg or arm might fall off.

Right at the end sat the man called Saturday, the simplest and the
most baffling of all. He was a short, square man with a dark,
square face clean-shaven, a medical practitioner going by the name
of Bull. He had that combination of savoir-faire with a sort of
well-groomed coarseness which is not uncommon in young doctors. He
carried his fine clothes with confidence rather than ease, and he
mostly wore a set smile. There was nothing whatever odd about him,
except that he wore a pair of dark, almost opaque spectacles. It
may have been merely a crescendo of nervous fancy that had gone
before, but those black discs were dreadful to Syme; they reminded
him of half-remembered ugly tales, of some story about pennies
being put on the eyes of the dead. Syme's eye always caught the
black glasses and the blind grin. Had the dying Professor worn
them, or even the pale Secretary, they would have been appropriate.
But on the younger and grosser man they seemed only an enigma. They
took away the key of the face. You could not tell what his smile or
his gravity meant. Partly from this, and partly because he had a
vulgar virility wanting in most of the others it seemed to Syme
that he might be the wickedest of all those wicked men. Syme even
had the thought that his eyes might be covered up because they were
too frightful to see.



CHAPTER VI

THE EXPOSURE

SUCH were the six men who had sworn to destroy the world. Again
and again Syme strove to pull together his common sense in their
presence. Sometimes he saw for an instant that these notions were
subjective, that he was only looking at ordinary men, one of whom
was old, another nervous, another short-sighted. The sense of an
unnatural symbolism always settled back on him again. Each figure
seemed to be, somehow, on the borderland of things, just as their
theory was on the borderland of thought. He knew that each one of
these men stood at the extreme end, so to speak, of some wild road
of reasoning. He could only fancy, as in some old-world fable,
that if a man went westward to the end of the world he would find
something--say a tree--that was more or less than a tree, a tree
possessed by a spirit; and that if he went east to the end of the
world he would find something else that was not wholly itself--a
tower, perhaps, of which the very shape was wicked. So these
figures seemed to stand up, violent and unaccountable, against an
ultimate horizon, visions from the verge. The ends of the earth
were closing in.

Talk had been going on steadily as he took in the scene; and not
the least of the contrasts of that bewildering breakfast-table was
the contrast between the easy and unobtrusive tone of talk and its
terrible purport. They were deep in the discussion of an actual and
immediate plot. The waiter downstairs had spoken quite correctly
when he said that they were talking about bombs and kings. Only
three days afterwards the Czar was to meet the President of the
French Republic in Paris, and over their bacon and eggs upon their
sunny balcony these beaming gentlemen had decided how both should
die. Even the instrument was chosen; the black-bearded Marquis, it
appeared, was to carry the bomb.

Ordinarily speaking, the proximity of this positive and objective
crime would have sobered Syme, and cured him of all his merely
mystical tremors. He would have thought of nothing but the need of
saving at least two human bodies from being ripped in pieces with
iron and roaring gas. But the truth was that by this time he had
begun to feel a third kind of fear, more piercing and practical
than either his moral revulsion or his social responsibility. Very
simply, he had no fear to spare for the French President or the
Czar; he had begun to fear for himself. Most of the talkers took
little heed of him, debating now with their faces closer together,
and almost uniformly grave, save when for an instant the smile of
the Secretary ran aslant across his face as the jagged lightning
runs aslant across the sky. But there was one persistent thing
which first troubled Syme and at last terrified him. The President
was always looking at him, steadily, and with a great and baffling
interest. The enormous man was quite quiet, but his blue eyes
stood out of his head. And they were always fixed on Syme.

Syme felt moved to spring up and leap over the balcony. When the
President's eyes were on him he felt as if he were made of glass.
He had hardly the shred of a doubt that in some silent and
extraordinary way Sunday had found out that he was a spy. He
looked over the edge of the balcony, and saw a policeman, standing
abstractedly just beneath, staring at the bright railings and the
sunlit trees.

Then there fell upon him the great temptation that was to torment
him for many days. In the presence of these powerful and repulsive
men, who were the princes of anarchy, he had almost forgotten the
frail and fanciful figure of the poet Gregory, the mere aesthete of
anarchism. He even thought of him now with an old kindness, as if
they had played together when children. But he remembered that he
was still tied to Gregory by a great promise. He had promised never
to do the very thing that he now felt himself almost in the act of
doing. He had promised not to jump over that balcony and speak to
that policeman. He took his cold hand off the cold stone
balustrade. His soul swayed in a vertigo of moral indecision. He
had only to snap the thread of a rash vow made to a villainous
society, and all his life could be as open and sunny as the square
beneath him. He had, on the other hand, only to keep his antiquated
honour, and be delivered inch by inch into the power of this great
enemy of mankind, whose very intellect was a torture-chamber.
Whenever he looked down into the square he saw the comfortable
policeman, a pillar of common sense and common order. Whenever he
looked back at the breakfast-table he saw the President still
quietly studying him with big, unbearable eyes.

In all the torrent of his thought there were two thoughts that
never crossed his mind. First, it never occurred to him to doubt
that the President and his Council could crush him if he continued
to stand alone. The place might be public, the project might seem
impossible. But Sunday was not the man who would carry himself
thus easily without having, somehow or somewhere, set open his
iron trap. Either by anonymous poison or sudden street accident,
by hypnotism or by fire from hell, Sunday could certainly strike
him. If he defied the man he was probably dead, either struck
stiff there in his chair or long afterwards as by an innocent
ailment. If he called in the police promptly, arrested everyone,
told all, and set against them the whole energy of England, he
would probably escape; certainly not otherwise. They were a
balconyful of gentlemen overlooking a bright and busy square; but
he felt no more safe with them than if they had been a boatful of
armed pirates overlooking an empty sea.

There was a second thought that never came to him. It never
occurred to him to be spiritually won over to the enemy. Many
moderns, inured to a weak worship of intellect and force, might
have wavered in their allegiance under this oppression of a great
personality. They might have called Sunday the super-man. If any
such creature be conceivable, he looked, indeed, somewhat like it,
with his earth-shaking abstraction, as of a stone statue walking.
He might have been called something above man, with his large
plans, which were too obvious to be detected, with his large face,
which was too frank to be understood. But this was a kind of
modern meanness to which Syme could not sink even in his extreme
morbidity. Like any man, he was coward enough to fear great force;
but he was not quite coward enough to admire it.

The men were eating as they talked, and even in this they were
typical. Dr. Bull and the Marquis ate casually and conventionally
of the best things on the table--cold pheasant or Strasbourg pie.
But the Secretary was a vegetarian, and he spoke earnestly of the
projected murder over half a raw tomato and three quarters of a
glass of tepid water. The old Professor had such slops as suggested
a sickening second childhood. And even in this President Sunday
preserved his curious predominance of mere mass. For he ate like
twenty men; he ate incredibly, with a frightful freshness of
appetite, so that it was like watching a sausage factory. Yet
continually, when he had swallowed a dozen crumpets or drunk a
quart of coffee, he would be found with his great head on one side
staring at Syme.

"I have often wondered," said the Marquis, taking a great bite out
of a slice of bread and jam, "whether it wouldn't be better for me
to do it with a knife. Most of the best things have been brought
off with a knife. And it would be a new emotion to get a knife into
a French President and wriggle it round."

"You are wrong," said the Secretary, drawing his black brows
together. "The knife was merely the expression of the old personal
quarrel with a personal tyrant. Dynamite is not only our best tool,
but our best symbol. It is as perfect a symbol of us as is incense
of the prayers of the Christians. It expands; it only destroys
because it broadens; even so, thought only destroys because it
broadens. A man's brain is a bomb," he cried out, loosening
suddenly his strange passion and striking his own skull with
violence. "My brain feels like a bomb, night and day. It must
expand! It must expand! A man's brain must expand, if it breaks up
the universe."

"I don't want the universe broken up just yet," drawled the
Marquis. "I want to do a lot of beastly things before I die.
I thought of one yesterday in bed."

"No, if the only end of the thing is nothing," said Dr. Bull with
his sphinx-like smile, "it hardly seems worth doing."

The old Professor was staring at the ceiling with dull eyes.

"Every man knows in his heart," he said, "that nothing is worth
doing."

There was a singular silence, and then the Secretary said--

"We are wandering, however, from the point. The only question is
how Wednesday is to strike the blow. I take it we should all agree
with the original notion of a bomb. As to the actual arrangements,
I should suggest that tomorrow morning he should go first of all
to--"

The speech was broken off short under a vast shadow. President
Sunday had risen to his feet, seeming to fill the sky above them.

"Before we discuss that," he said in a small, quiet voice, "let us
go into a private room. I have something vent particular to say."

Syme stood up before any of the others. The instant of choice had
come at last, the pistol was at his head. On the pavement before
he could hear the policeman idly stir and stamp, for the morning,
though bright, was cold.

A barrel-organ in the street suddenly sprang with a jerk into a
jovial tune. Syme stood up taut, as if it had been a bugle before
the battle. He found himself filled with a supernatural courage
that came from nowhere. That jingling music seemed full of the
vivacity, the vulgarity, and the irrational valour of the poor, who
in all those unclean streets were all clinging to the decencies and
the charities of Christendom. His youthful prank of being a
policeman had faded from his mind; he did not think of himself as
the representative of the corps of gentlemen turned into fancy
constables, or of the old eccentric who lived in the dark room.
But he did feel himself as the ambassador of all these common and
kindly people in the street, who every day marched into battle to
the music of the barrel-organ. And this high pride in being human
had lifted him unaccountably to an infinite height above the
monstrous men around him. For an instant, at least, he looked down
upon all their sprawling eccentricities from the starry pinnacle
of the commonplace. He felt towards them all that unconscious and
elementary superiority that a brave man feels over powerful beasts
or a wise man over powerful errors. He knew that he had neither the
intellectual nor the physical strength of President Sunday; but in
that moment he minded it no more than the fact that he had not the
muscles of a tiger or a horn on his nose like a rhinoceros. All was
swallowed up in an ultimate certainty that the President was wrong
and that the barrel-organ was right. There clanged in his mind that
unanswerable and terrible truism in the song of Roland--

"Pagens ont tort et Chretiens ont droit."

which in the old nasal French has the clang and groan of great
iron. This liberation of his spirit from the load of his weakness
went with a quite clear decision to embrace death. If the people of
the barrel-organ could keep their old-world obligations, so could
he. This very pride in keeping his word was that he was keeping it
to miscreants. It was his last triumph over these lunatics to go
down into their dark room and die for something that they could not
even understand. The barrel-organ seemed to give the marching tune
with the energy and the mingled noises of a whole orchestra; and he
could hear deep and rolling, under all the trumpets of the pride of
life, the drums of the pride of death.

The conspirators were already filing through the open window and
into the rooms behind. Syme went last, outwardly calm, but with all
his brain and body throbbing with romantic rhythm. The President
led them down an irregular side stair, such as might be used by
servants, and into a dim, cold, empty room, with a table and
benches, like an abandoned boardroom. When they were all in, he
closed and locked the door.

The first to speak was Gogol, the irreconcilable, who seemed
bursting with inarticulate grievance.

"Zso! Zso!" he cried, with an obscure excitement, his heavy Polish
accent becoming almost impenetrable. "You zay you nod 'ide. You zay
you show himselves. It is all nuzzinks. Ven you vant talk
importance you run yourselves in a dark box!"

The President seemed to take the foreigner's incoherent satire with
entire good humour.

"You can't get hold of it yet, Gogol," he said in a fatherly way.
"When once they have heard us talking nonsense on that balcony they
will not care where we go afterwards. If we had come here first, we
should have had the whole staff at the keyhole. You don't seem to
know anything about mankind."

"I die for zem," cried the Pole in thick excitement, "and I slay
zare oppressors. I care not for these games of gonzealment. I would
zmite ze tyrant in ze open square."

"I see, I see," said the President, nodding kindly as he seated
himself at the top of a long table. "You die for mankind first, and
then you get up and smite their oppressors. So that's all right.
And now may I ask you to control your beautiful sentiments, and sit
down with the other gentlemen at this table. For the first time
this morning something intelligent is going to be said."

Syme, with the perturbed promptitude he had shown since the
original summons, sat down first. Gogol sat down last, grumbling
in his brown beard about gombromise. No one except Syme seemed to
have any notion of the blow that was about to fall. As for him,
he had merely the feeling of a man mounting the scaffold with the
intention, at any rate, of making a good speech.

"Comrades," said the President, suddenly rising, "we have spun out
this farce long enough. I have called you down here to tell you
something so simple and shocking that even the waiters upstairs
(long inured to our levities) might hear some new seriousness in
my voice. Comrades, we were discussing plans and naming places. I
propose, before saying anything else, that those plans and places
should not be voted by this meeting, but should be left wholly in
the control of some one reliable member. I suggest Comrade
Saturday, Dr. Bull."

They all stared at him; then they all started in their seats, for
the next words, though not loud, had a living and sensational
emphasis. Sunday struck the table.

"Not one word more about the plans and places must be said at this
meeting. Not one tiny detail more about what we mean to do must be
mentioned in this company."

Sunday had spent his life in astonishing his followers; but it
seemed as if he had never really astonished them until now. They
all moved feverishly in their seats, except Syme. He sat stiff in
his, with his hand in his pocket, and on the handle of his loaded
revolver. When the attack on him came he would sell his life dear.
He would find out at least if the President was mortal.

Sunday went on smoothly--

"You will probably understand that there is only one possible
motive for forbidding free speech at this festival of freedom.
Strangers overhearing us matters nothing. They assume that we
are joking. But what would matter, even unto death, is this,
that there should be one actually among us who is not of us,
who knows our grave purpose, but does not share it, who--"

The Secretary screamed out suddenly like a woman.

"It can't be!" he cried, leaping. "There can't--"

The President flapped his large flat hand on the table like the
fin of some huge fish.

"Yes," he said slowly, "there is a spy in this room. There is a
traitor at this table. I will waste no more words. His name--"

Syme half rose from his seat, his finger firm on the trigger.

"His name is Gogol," said the President. "He is that hairy humbug
over there who pretends to be a Pole."

Gogol sprang to his feet, a pistol in each hand. With the same
flash three men sprang at his throat. Even the Professor made
an effort to rise. But Syme saw little of the scene, for he was
blinded with a beneficent darkness; he had sunk down into his
seat shuddering, in a palsy of passionate relief.



CHAPTER VII

THE UNACCOUNTABLE CONDUCT OF PROFESSOR DE WORMS

"SIT down!" said Sunday in a voice that he used once or twice in
his life, a voice that made men drop drawn swords.

The three who had risen fell away from Gogol, and that equivocal
person himself resumed his seat.

"Well, my man," said the President briskly, addressing him as one
addresses a total stranger, "will you oblige me by putting your
hand in your upper waistcoat pocket and showing me what you have
there?"

The alleged Pole was a little pale under his tangle of dark hair,
but he put two fingers into the pocket with apparent coolness and
pulled out a blue strip of card. When Syme saw it lying on the
table, he woke up again to the world outside him. For although
the card lay at the other extreme of the table, and he could read
nothing of the inscription on it, it bore a startling resemblance
to the blue card in his own pocket, the card which had been given
to him when he joined the anti-anarchist constabulary.

"Pathetic Slav," said the President, "tragic child of Poland, are
you prepared in the presence of that card to deny that you are in
this company--shall we say de trop?"

"Right oh!" said the late Gogol. It made everyone jump to hear a
clear, commercial and somewhat cockney voice coming out of that
forest of foreign hair. It was irrational, as if a Chinaman had
suddenly spoken with a Scotch accent.

"I gather that you fully understand your position," said Sunday.

"You bet," answered the Pole. "I see it's a fair cop. All I say is,
I don't believe any Pole could have imitated my accent like I did
his."

"I concede the point," said Sunday. "I believe your own accent to
be inimitable, though I shall practise it in my bath. Do you mind
leaving your beard with your card?"

"Not a bit," answered Gogol; and with one finger he ripped off the
whole of his shaggy head-covering, emerging with thin red hair and
a pale, pert face. "It was hot," he added.

"I will do you the justice to say," said Sunday, not without a sort
of brutal admiration, "that you seem to have kept pretty cool under
it. Now listen to me. I like you. The consequence is that it would
annoy me for just about two and a half minutes if I heard that you
had died in torments. Well, if you ever tell the police or any
human soul about us, I shall have that two and a half minutes of
discomfort. On your discomfort I will not dwell. Good day. Mind the
step."

The red-haired detective who had masqueraded as Gogol rose to his
feet without a word, and walked out of the room with an air of
perfect nonchalance. Yet the astonished Syme was able to realise
that this ease was suddenly assumed; for there was a slight stumble
outside the door, which showed that the departing detective had not
minded the step.

"Time is flying," said the President in his gayest manner, after
glancing at his watch, which like everything about him seemed
bigger than it ought to be. "I must go off at once; I have to
take the chair at a Humanitarian meeting."

The Secretary turned to him with working eyebrows.

"Would it not be better," he said a little sharply, "to discuss
further the details of our project, now that the spy has left us?"

"No, I think not," said the President with a yawn like an
unobtrusive earthquake. "Leave it as it is. Let Saturday settle
it. I must be off. Breakfast here next Sunday."

But the late loud scenes had whipped up the almost naked nerves
of the Secretary. He was one of those men who are conscientious
even in crime.

"I must protest, President, that the thing is irregular," he said.
"It is a fundamental rule of our society that all plans shall be
debated in full council. Of course, I fully appreciate your
forethought when in the actual presence of a traitor--"

"Secretary," said the President seriously, "if you'd take your head
home and boil it for a turnip it might be useful. I can't say. But
it might.

The Secretary reared back in a kind of equine anger.

"I really fail to understand--" he began in high offense.

"That's it, that's it," said the President, nodding a great many
times. "That's where you fail right enough. You fail to understand.
Why, you dancing donkey," he roared, rising, "you didn't want to be
overheard by a spy, didn't you? How do you know you aren't
overheard now?"

And with these words he shouldered his way out of the room, shaking
with incomprehensible scorn.

Four of the men left behind gaped after him without any apparent
glimmering of his meaning. Syme alone had even a glimmering, and
such as it was it froze him to the bone. If the last words of the
President meant anything, they meant that he had not after all
passed unsuspected. They meant that while Sunday could not denounce
him like Gogol, he still could not trust him like the others.

The other four got to their feet grumbling more or less, and betook
themselves elsewhere to find lunch, for it was already well past
midday. The Professor went last, very slowly and painfully. Syme
sat long after the rest had gone, revolving his strange position.
He had escaped a thunderbolt, but he was still under a cloud. At
last he rose and made his way out of the hotel into Leicester
Square. The bright, cold day had grown increasingly colder, and
when he came out into the street he was surprised by a few flakes
of snow. While he still carried the sword-stick and the rest of
Gregory's portable luggage, he had thrown the cloak down and left
it somewhere, perhaps on the steam-tug, perhaps on the balcony.
Hoping, therefore, that the snow-shower might be slight, he stepped
back out of the street for a moment and stood up under the doorway
of a small and greasy hair-dresser's shop, the front window of
which was empty, except for a sickly wax lady in evening dress.

Snow, however, began to thicken and fall fast; and Syme, having
found one glance at the wax lady quite sufficient to depress his
spirits, stared out instead into the white and empty street. He was
considerably astonished to see, standing quite still outside the
shop and staring into the window, a man. His top hat was loaded
with snow like the hat of Father Christmas, the white drift was
rising round his boots and ankles; but it seemed as if nothing
could tear him away from the contemplation of the colourless wax
doll in dirty evening dress. That any human being should stand in
such weather looking into such a shop was a matter of sufficient
wonder to Syme; but his idle wonder turned suddenly into a personal
shock; for he realised that the man standing there was the
paralytic old Professor de Worms. It scarcely seemed the place for
a person of his years and infirmities.

Syme was ready to believe anything about the perversions of this
dehumanized brotherhood; but even he could not believe that the
Professor had fallen in love with that particular wax lady. He
could only suppose that the man's malady (whatever it was) involved
some momentary fits of rigidity or trance. He was not inclined,
however, to feel in this case any very compassionate concern. On
the contrary, he rather congratulated himself that the Professor's
stroke and his elaborate and limping walk would make it easy to
escape from him and leave him miles behind. For Syme thirsted first
and last to get clear of the whole poisonous atmosphere, if only
for an hour. Then he could collect his thoughts, formulate his
policy, and decide finally whether he should or should not keep
faith with Gregory.

He strolled away through the dancing snow, turned up two or three
streets, down through two or three others, and entered a small Soho
restaurant for lunch. He partook reflectively of four small and
quaint courses, drank half a bottle of red wine, and ended up over
black coffee and a black cigar, still thinking. He had taken his
seat in the upper room of the restaurant, which was full of the
chink of knives and the chatter of foreigners. He remembered that
in old days he had imagined that all these harmless and kindly
aliens were anarchists. He shuddered, remembering the real thing.
But even the shudder had the delightful shame of escape. The wine,
the common food, the familiar place, the faces of natural and
talkative men, made him almost feel as if the Council of the Seven
Days had been a bad dream; and although he knew it was nevertheless
an objective reality, it was at least a distant one. Tall houses
and populous streets lay between him and his last sight of the
shameful seven; he was free in free London, and drinking wine among
the free. With a somewhat easier action, he took his hat and stick
and strolled down the stair into the shop below.

When he entered that lower room he stood stricken and rooted to the
spot. At a small table, close up to the blank window and the white
street of snow, sat the old anarchist Professor over a glass of
milk, with his lifted livid face and pendent eyelids. For an
instant Syme stood as rigid as the stick he leant upon. Then with a
gesture as of blind hurry, he brushed past the Professor, dashing
open the door and slamming it behind him, and stood outside in the
snow.

"Can that old corpse be following me?" he asked himself, biting his
yellow moustache. "I stopped too long up in that room, so that even
such leaden feet could catch me up. One comfort is, with a little
brisk walking I can put a man like that as far away as Timbuctoo.
Or am I too fanciful? Was he really following me? Surely Sunday
would not be such a fool as to send a lame man? "

He set off at a smart pace, twisting and whirling his stick, in
the direction of Covent Garden. As he crossed the great market the
snow increased, growing blinding and bewildering as the afternoon
began to darken. The snow-flakes tormented him like a swarm of
silver bees. Getting into his eyes and beard, they added their
unremitting futility to his already irritated nerves; and by the
time that he had come at a swinging pace to the beginning of Fleet
Street, he lost patience, and finding a Sunday teashop, turned
into it to take shelter. He ordered another cup of black coffee
as an excuse. Scarcely had he done so, when Professor de Worms
hobbled heavily into the shop, sat down with difficulty and
ordered a glass of milk.

Syme's walking-stick had fallen from his hand with a great clang,
which confessed the concealed steel. But the Professor did not look
round. Syme, who was commonly a cool character, was literally
gaping as a rustic gapes at a conjuring trick. He had seen no cab
following; he had heard no wheels outside the shop; to all mortal
appearances the man had come on foot. But the old man could only
walk like a snail, and Syme had walked like the wind. He started up
and snatched his stick, half crazy with the contradiction in mere
arithmetic, and swung out of the swinging doors, leaving his coffee
untasted. An omnibus going to the Bank went rattling by with an
unusual rapidity. He had a violent run of a hundred yards to reach
it; but he managed to spring, swaying upon the splash-board and,
pausing for an instant to pant, he climbed on to the top. When he
had been seated for about half a minute, he heard behind him a sort
of heavy and asthmatic breathing.

Turning sharply, he saw rising gradually higher and higher up
the omnibus steps a top hat soiled and dripping with snow, and
under the shadow of its brim the short-sighted face and shaky
shoulders of Professor de Worms. He let himself into a seat with
characteristic care, and wrapped himself up to the chin in the
mackintosh rug.

Every movement of the old man's tottering figure and vague hands,
every uncertain gesture and panic-stricken pause, seemed to put
it beyond question that he was helpless, that he was in the last
imbecility of the body. He moved by inches, he let himself down
with little gasps of caution. And yet, unless the philosophical
entities called time and space have no vestige even of a practical
existence, it appeared quite unquestionable that he had run after
the omnibus.

Syme sprang erect upon the rocking car, and after staring wildly
at the wintry sky, that grew gloomier every moment, he ran down
the steps. He had repressed an elemental impulse to leap over the
side.

Too bewildered to look back or to reason, he rushed into one of
the little courts at the side of Fleet Street as a rabbit rushes
into a hole. He had a vague idea, if this incomprehensible old
Jack-in-the-box was really pursuing him, that in that labyrinth of
little streets he could soon throw him off the scent. He dived in
and out of those crooked lanes, which were more like cracks than
thoroughfares; and by the time that he had completed about twenty
alternate angles and described an unthinkable polygon, he paused
to listen for any sound of pursuit. There was none; there could
not in any case have been much, for the little streets were thick
with the soundless snow. Somewhere behind Red Lion Court, however,
he noticed a place where some energetic citizen had cleared away
the snow for a space of about twenty yards, leaving the wet,
glistening cobble-stones. He thought little of this as he passed
it, only plunging into yet another arm of the maze. But when a few
hundred yards farther on he stood still again to listen, his heart
stood still also, for he heard from that space of rugged stones
the clinking crutch and labouring feet of the infernal cripple.

The sky above was loaded with the clouds of snow, leaving London
in a darkness and oppression premature for that hour of the
evening. On each side of Syme the walls of the alley were blind
and featureless; there was no little window or any kind of eve. He
felt a new impulse to break out of this hive of houses, and to get
once more into the open and lamp-lit street. Yet he rambled and
dodged for a long time before he struck the main thoroughfare.
When he did so, he struck it much farther up than he had fancied.
He came out into what seemed the vast and void of Ludgate Circus,
and saw St. Paul's Cathedral sitting in the sky.

At first he was startled to find these great roads so empty, as if
a pestilence had swept through the city. Then he told himself that
some degree of emptiness was natural; first because the snow-storm
was even dangerously deep, and secondly because it was Sunday. And
at the very word Sunday he bit his lip; the word was henceforth for
hire like some indecent pun. Under the white fog of snow high up in
the heaven the whole atmosphere of the city was turned to a very
queer kind of green twilight, as of men under the sea. The sealed
and sullen sunset behind the dark dome of St. Paul's had in it
smoky and sinister colours--colours of sickly green, dead red or
decaying bronze, that were just bright enough to emphasise the
solid whiteness of the snow. But right up against these dreary
colours rose the black bulk of the cathedral; and upon the top of
the cathedral was a random splash and great stain of snow, still
clinging as to an Alpine peak. It had fallen accidentally, but just
so fallen as to half drape the dome from its very topmost point,
and to pick out in perfect silver the great orb and the cross. When
Syme saw it he suddenly straightened himself, and made with his
sword-stick an involuntary salute.

He knew that that evil figure, his shadow, was creeping quickly or
slowly behind him, and he did not care.

It seemed a symbol of human faith and valour that while the skies
were darkening that high place of the earth was bright. The
devils might have captured heaven, but they had not yet captured
the cross. He had a new impulse to tear out the secret of this
dancing, jumping and pursuing paralytic; and at the entrance of
the court as it opened upon the Circus he turned, stick in hand,
to face his pursuer.

Professor de Worms came slowly round the corner of the irregular
alley behind him, his unnatural form outlined against a lonely
gas-lamp, irresistibly recalling that very imaginative figure in
the nursery rhymes, "the crooked man who went a crooked mile." He
really looked as if he had been twisted out of shape by the
tortuous streets he had been threading. He came nearer and nearer,
the lamplight shining on his lifted spectacles, his lifted,
patient face. Syme waited for him as St. George waited for the
dragon, as a man waits for a final explanation or for death. And
the old Professor came right up to him and passed him like a total
stranger, without even a blink of his mournful eyelids.

There was something in this silent and unexpected innocence that
left Syme in a final fury. The man's colourless face and manner
seemed to assert that the whole following had been an accident.
Syme was galvanised with an energy that was something between
bitterness and a burst of boyish derision. He made a wild gesture
as if to knock the old man's hat off, called out something like
"Catch me if you can," and went racing away across the white, open
Circus. Concealment was impossible now; and looking back over his
shoulder, he could see the black figure of the old gentleman coming
after him with long, swinging strides like a man winning a mile
race. But the head upon that bounding body was still pale, grave
and professional, like the head of a lecturer upon the body of a
harlequin.

This outrageous chase sped across Ludgate Circus, up Ludgate Hill,
round St. Paul's Cathedral, along Cheapside, Syme remembering all
the nightmares he had ever known. Then Syme broke away towards the
river, and ended almost down by the docks. He saw the yellow panes
of a low, lighted public-house, flung himself into it and ordered
beer. It was a foul tavern, sprinkled with foreign sailors, a
place where opium might be smoked or knives drawn.

A moment later Professor de Worms entered the place, sat down
carefully, and asked for a glass of milk.



CHAPTER VIII

THE PROFESSOR EXPLAINS

WHEN Gabriel Syme found himself finally established in a chair,
and opposite to him, fixed and final also, the lifted eyebrows and
leaden eyelids of the Professor, his fears fully returned. This
incomprehensible man from the fierce council, after all, had
certainly pursued him. If the man had one character as a paralytic
and another character as a pursuer, the antithesis might make him
more interesting, but scarcely more soothing. It would be a very
small comfort that he could not find the Professor out, if by some
serious accident the Professor should find him out. He emptied a
whole pewter pot of ale before the professor had touched his milk.

One possibility, however, kept him hopeful and yet helpless. It was
just possible that this escapade signified something other than
even a slight suspicion of him. Perhaps it was some regular form or
sign. Perhaps the foolish scamper was some sort of friendly signal
that he ought to have understood. Perhaps it was a ritual. Perhaps
the new Thursday was always chased along Cheapside, as the new Lord
Mayor is always escorted along it. He was just selecting a
tentative inquiry, when the old Professor opposite suddenly and
simply cut him short. Before Syme could ask the first diplomatic
question, the old anarchist had asked suddenly, without any sort of
preparation--

"Are you a policeman?"

Whatever else Syme had expected, he had never expected anything so
brutal and actual as this. Even his great presence of mind could
only manage a reply with an air of rather blundering jocularity.

"A policeman?" he said, laughing vaguely. "Whatever made you think
of a policeman in connection with me?"

"The process was simple enough," answered the Professor patiently.
"I thought you looked like a policeman. I think so now."

"Did I take a policeman's hat by mistake out of the restaurant?"
asked Syme, smiling wildly. "Have I by any chance got a number
stuck on to me somewhere? Have my boots got that watchful look?
Why must I be a policeman? Do, do let me be a postman."

The old Professor shook his head with a gravity that gave no hope,
but Syme ran on with a feverish irony.

"But perhaps I misunderstood the delicacies of your German
philosophy. Perhaps policeman is a relative term. In an
evolutionary sense, sir, the ape fades so gradually into the
policeman, that I myself can never detect the shade. The monkey is
only the policeman that may be. Perhaps a maiden lady on Clapham
Common is only the policeman that might have been. I don't mind
being the policeman that might have been. I don't mind being
anything in German thought."

"Are you in the police service?" said the old man, ignoring all
Syme's improvised and desperate raillery. "Are you a detective?"

Syme's heart turned to stone, but his face never changed.

"Your suggestion is ridiculous," he began. "Why on earth--"

The old man struck his palsied hand passionately on the rickety
table, nearly breaking it.

"Did you hear me ask a plain question, you pattering spy?" he
shrieked in a high, crazy voice. "Are you, or are you not, a
police detective?"

"No!" answered Syme, like a man standing on the hangman's drop.

"You swear it," said the old man, leaning across to him, his dead
face becoming as it were loathsomely alive. "You swear it! You
swear it! If you swear falsely, will you be damned? Will you be
sure that the devil dances at your funeral? Will you see that the
nightmare sits on your grave? Will there really be no mistake? You
are an anarchist, you are a dynamiter! Above all, you are not in
any sense a detective? You are not in the British police?"

He leant his angular elbow far across the table, and put up his
large loose hand like a flap to his ear.

"I am not in the British police," said Syme with insane calm.

Professor de Worms fell back in his chair with a curious air of
kindly collapse.

"That's a pity," he said, "because I am."

Syme sprang up straight, sending back the bench behind him with a
crash.

"Because you are what?" he said thickly. "You are what?"

"I am a policeman," said the Professor with his first broad smile.
and beaming through his spectacles. "But as you think policeman
only a relative term, of course I have nothing to do with you. I
am in the British police force; but as you tell me you are not in
the British police force, I can only say that I met you in a
dynamiters' club. I suppose I ought to arrest you." And with these
words he laid on the table before Syme an exact facsimile of the
blue card which Syme had in his own waistcoat pocket, the symbol
of his power from the police.

Syme had for a flash the sensation that the cosmos had turned
exactly upside down, that all trees were growing downwards and
that all stars were under his feet. Then came slowly the opposite
conviction. For the last twenty-four hours the cosmos had really
been upside down, but now the capsized universe had come right side
up again. This devil from whom he had been fleeing all day was only
an elder brother of his own house, who on the other side of the
table lay back and laughed at him. He did not for the moment ask
any questions of detail; he only knew the happy and silly fact that
this shadow, which had pursued him with an intolerable oppression
of peril, was only the shadow of a friend trying to catch him up.
He knew simultaneously that he was a fool and a free man. For with
any recovery from morbidity there must go a certain healthy
humiliation. There comes a certain point in such conditions when
only three things are possible: first a perpetuation of Satanic
pride, secondly tears, and third laughter. Syme's egotism held hard
to the first course for a few seconds, and then suddenly adopted
the third. Taking his own blue police ticket from his own waist
coat pocket, he tossed it on to the table; then he flung his head
back until his spike of yellow beard almost pointed at the ceiling,
and shouted with a barbaric laughter.

Even in that close den, perpetually filled with the din of knives,
plates, cans, clamorous voices, sudden struggles and stampedes,
there was something Homeric in Syme's mirth which made many
half-drunken men look round.

"What yer laughing at, guv'nor?" asked one wondering labourer from
the docks.

"At myself," answered Syme, and went off again into the agony of
his ecstatic reaction.

"Pull yourself together," said the Professor, "or you'll get
hysterical. Have some more beer. I'll join you."

"You haven't drunk your milk," said Syme.

"My milk!" said the other, in tones of withering and unfathomable
contempt, "my milk! Do you think I'd look at the beastly stuff when
I'm out of sight of the bloody anarchists? We're all Christians in
this room, though perhaps," he added, glancing around at the
reeling crowd, "not strict ones. Finish my milk? Great blazes! yes,
I'll finish it right enough!" and he knocked the tumbler off the
table, making a crash of glass and a splash of silver fluid.

Syme was staring at him with a happy curiosity.

"I understand now," he cried; "of course, you're not an old man at
all."

"I can't take my face off here," replied Professor de Worms. "It's
rather an elaborate make-up. As to whether I'm an old man, that's
not for me to say. I was thirty-eight last birthday."

"Yes, but I mean," said Syme impatiently, "there's nothing the
matter with you."

"Yes," answered the other dispassionately. "I am subject to colds."

Syme's laughter at all this had about it a wild weakness of relief.
He laughed at the idea of the paralytic Professor being really a
young actor dressed up as if for the foot-lights. But he felt that
he would have laughed as loudly if a pepperpot had fallen over.

The false Professor drank and wiped his false beard.

"Did you know," he asked, "that that man Gogol was one of us?"

"I? No, I didn't know it," answered Syme in some surprise. "But
didn't you?"

"I knew no more than the dead," replied the man who called himself
de Worms. "I thought the President was talking about me, and I
rattled in my boots."

"And I thought he was talking about me," said Syme, with his rather
reckless laughter. "I had my hand on my revolver all the time."

"So had I," said the Professor grimly; "so had Gogol evidently."

Syme struck the table with an exclamation.

"Why, there were three of us there!" he cried. "Three out of seven
is a fighting number. If we had only known that we were three!"

The face of Professor de Worms darkened, and he did not look up.

"We were three," he said. "If we had been three hundred we could
still have done nothing."

"Not if we were three hundred against four?" asked Syme, jeering
rather boisterously.

"No," said the Professor with sobriety, "not if we were three
hundred against Sunday."

And the mere name struck Syme cold and serious; his laughter had
died in his heart before it could die on his lips. The face of
the unforgettable President sprang into his mind as startling as
a coloured photograph, and he remarked this difference between
Sunday and all his satellites, that their faces, however fierce
or sinister, became gradually blurred by memory like other human
faces, whereas Sunday's seemed almost to grow more actual during
absence, as if a man's painted portrait should slowly come alive.

They were both silent for a measure of moments, and then Syme's
speech came with a rush, like the sudden foaming of champagne.

"Professor," he cried, "it is intolerable. Are you afraid of this
man?"

The Professor lifted his heavy lids, and gazed at Syme with large,
wide-open, blue eyes of an almost ethereal honesty.

"Yes, I am," he said mildly. "So are you."

Syme was dumb for an instant. Then he rose to his feet erect, like
an insulted man, and thrust the chair away from him.

"Yes," he said in a voice indescribable, "you are right. I am
afraid of him. Therefore I swear by God that I will seek out this
man whom I fear until I find him, and strike him on the mouth. If
heaven were his throne and the earth his footstool, I swear that
I would pull him down."

"How?" asked the staring Professor. "Why?"

"Because I am afraid of him," said Syme; "and no man should leave
in the universe anything of which he is afraid."

De Worms blinked at him with a sort of blind wonder. He made an
effort to speak, but Syme went on in a low voice, but with an
undercurrent of inhuman exaltation--

"Who would condescend to strike down the mere things that he does
not fear? Who would debase himself to be merely brave, like any
common prizefighter? Who would stoop to be fearless--like a tree?
Fight the thing that you fear. You remember the old tale of the
English clergyman who gave the last rites to the brigand of Sicily,
and how on his death-bed the great robber said, 'I can give you no
money, but I can give you advice for a lifetime: your thumb on the
blade, and strike upwards.' So I say to you, strike upwards, if you
strike at the stars."

The other looked at the ceiling, one of the tricks of his pose.

"Sunday is a fixed star," he said.

"You shall see him a falling star," said Syme, and put on his hat.

The decision of his gesture drew the Professor vaguely to his feet.

"Have you any idea," he asked, with a sort of benevolent
bewilderment, "exactly where you are going?"

"Yes," replied Syme shortly, "I am going to prevent this bomb being
thrown in Paris."

"Have you any conception how?" inquired the other.

"No," said Syme with equal decision.

"You remember, of course," resumed the soi-disant de Worms, pulling
his beard and looking out of the window, "that when we broke up
rather hurriedly the whole arrangements for the atrocity were left
in the private hands of the Marquis and Dr. Bull. The Marquis is by
this time probably crossing the Channel. But where he will go and
what he will do it is doubtful whether even the President knows;
certainly we don't know. The only man who does know is Dr. Bull.

"Confound it!" cried Syme. "And we don't know where he is."

"Yes," said the other in his curious, absent-minded way, "I know
where he is myself."

"Will you tell me?" asked Syme with eager eyes.

"I will take you there," said the Professor, and took down his own
hat from a peg.

Syme stood looking at him with a sort of rigid excitement.

"What do you mean?" he asked sharply. "Will you join me? Will you
take the risk?"

"Young man," said the Professor pleasantly, "I am amused to observe
that you think I am a coward. As to that I will say only one word,
and that shall be entirely in the manner of your own philosophical
rhetoric. You think that it is possible to pull down the President.
I know that it is impossible, and I am going to try it," and
opening the tavern door, which let in a blast of bitter air, they
went out together into the dark streets by the docks.

Most of the snow was melted or trampled to mud, but here and there
a clot of it still showed grey rather than white in the gloom. The
small streets were sloppy and full of pools, which reflected the
flaming lamps irregularly, and by accident, like fragments of some
other and fallen world. Syme felt almost dazed as he stepped
through this growing confusion of lights and shadows; but his
companion walked on with a certain briskness, towards where, at
the end of the street, an inch or two of the lamplit river looked
like a bar of flame.

"Where are you going?" Syme inquired.

"Just now," answered the Professor, "I am going just round the
corner to see whether Dr. Bull has gone to bed. He is hygienic,
and retires early."

"Dr. Bull!" exclaimed Syme. "Does he live round the corner?"

"No," answered his friend. "As a matter of fact he lives some way
off, on the other side of the river, but we can tell from here
whether he has gone to bed."

Turning the corner as he spoke, and facing the dim river, flecked
with flame, he pointed with his stick to the other bank. On the
Surrey side at this point there ran out into the Thames, seeming
almost to overhang it, a bulk and cluster of those tall tenements,
dotted with lighted windows, and rising like factory chimneys to
an almost insane height. Their special poise and position made one
block of buildings especially look like a Tower of Babel with a
hundred eyes. Syme had never seen any of the sky-scraping buildings
in America, so he could only think of the buildings in a dream.

Even as he stared, the highest light in this innumerably lighted
turret abruptly went out, as if this black Argus had winked at him
with one of his innumerable eyes.

Professor de Worms swung round on his heel, and struck his stick
against his boot.

"We are too late," he said, "the hygienic Doctor has gone to bed."

"What do you mean?" asked Syme. "Does he live over there, then?"

"Yes," said de Worms, "behind that particular window which you
can't see. Come along and get some dinner. We must call on him
tomorrow morning."

Without further parley, he led the way through several by-ways
until they came out into the flare and clamour of the East India
Dock Road. The Professor, who seemed to know his way about the
neighbourhood, proceeded to a place where the line of lighted
shops fell back into a sort of abrupt twilight and quiet, in which
an old white inn, all out of repair, stood back some twenty feet
from the road.

"You can find good English inns left by accident everywhere, like
fossils," explained the Professor. "I once found a decent place in
the West End."

"I suppose," said Syme, smiling, "that this is the corresponding
decent place in the East End?"

"It is," said the Professor reverently, and went in.

In that place they dined and slept, both very thoroughly. The
beans and bacon, which these unaccountable people cooked well,
the astonishing emergence of Burgundy from their cellars, crowned
Syme's sense of a new comradeship and comfort. Through all this
ordeal his root horror had been isolation, and there are no words
to express the abyss between isolation and having one ally. It may
be conceded to the mathematicians that four is twice two. But two
is not twice one; two is two thousand times one. That is why, in
spite of a hundred disadvantages, the world will always return to
monogamy.

Syme was able to pour out for the first time the whole of his
outrageous tale, from the time when Gregory had taken him to
the little tavern by the river. He did it idly and amply, in a
luxuriant monologue, as a man speaks with very old friends. On
his side, also, the man who had impersonated Professor de Worms
was not less communicative. His own story was almost as silly as
Syme's.

"That's a good get-up of yours," said Syme, draining a glass of
Macon; "a lot better than old Gogol's. Even at the start I thought
he was a bit too hairy."

"A difference of artistic theory," replied the Professor pensively.
"Gogol was an idealist. He made up as the abstract or platonic
ideal of an anarchist. But I am a realist. I am a portrait painter.
But, indeed, to say that I am a portrait painter is an inadequate
expression. I am a portrait."

"I don't understand you," said Syme.

"I am a portrait," repeated the Professor. "I am a portrait of the
celebrated Professor de Worms, who is, I believe, in Naples."

"You mean you are made up like him," said Syme. "But doesn't he
know that you are taking his nose in vain?"

"He knows it right enough," replied his friend cheerfully.

"Then why doesn't he denounce you?"

"I have denounced him," answered the Professor.

"Do explain yourself," said Syme.

"With pleasure, if you don't mind hearing my story," replied the
eminent foreign philosopher. "I am by profession an actor, and my
name is Wilks. When I was on the stage I mixed with all sorts of
Bohemian and blackguard company. Sometimes I touched the edge of
the turf, sometimes the riff-raff of the arts, and occasionally the
political refugee. In some den of exiled dreamers I was introduced
to the great German Nihilist philosopher, Professor de Worms. I did
not gather much about him beyond his appearance, which was very
disgusting, and which I studied carefully. I understood that he had
proved that the destructive principle in the universe was God;
hence he insisted on the need for a furious and incessant energy,
rending all things in pieces. Energy, he said, was the All. He was
lame, shortsighted, and partially paralytic. When I met him I was
in a frivolous mood, and I disliked him so much that I resolved to
imitate him. If I had been a draughtsman I would have drawn a
caricature. I was only an actor, I could only act a caricature. I
made myself up into what was meant for a wild exaggeration of the
old Professor's dirty old self. When I went into the room full of
his supporters I expected to be received with a roar of laughter,
or (if they were too far gone) with a roar of indignation at the
insult. I cannot describe the surprise I felt when my entrance was
received with a respectful silence, followed (when I had first
opened my lips) with a murmur of admiration. The curse of the
perfect artist had fallen upon me. I had been too subtle, I had
been too true. They thought I really was the great Nihilist
Professor. I was a healthy-minded young man at the time, and I
confess that it was a blow. Before I could fully recover, however,
two or three of these admirers ran up to me radiating indignation,
and told me that a public insult had been put upon me in the next
room. I inquired its nature. It seemed that an impertinent fellow
had dressed himself up as a preposterous parody of myself. I had
drunk more champagne than was good for me, and in a flash of folly
I decided to see the situation through. Consequently it was to meet
the glare of the company and my own lifted eyebrows and freezing
eyes that the real Professor came into the room.

"I need hardly say there was a collision. The pessimists all round
me looked anxiously from one Professor to the other Professor to
see which was really the more feeble. But I won. An old man in poor
health, like my rival, could not be expected to be so impressively
feeble as a young actor in the prime of life. You see, he really
had paralysis, and working within this definite limitation, he
couldn't be so jolly paralytic as I was. Then he tried to blast my
claims intellectually. I countered that by a very simple dodge.
Whenever he said something that nobody but he could understand, I
replied with something which I could not even understand myself.
'I don't fancy,' he said, 'that you could have worked out the
principle that evolution is only negation, since there inheres in
it the introduction of lacuna, which are an essential of
differentiation.' I replied quite scornfully, 'You read all that up
in Pinckwerts; the notion that involution functioned eugenically
was exposed long ago by Glumpe.' It is unnecessary for me to say
that there never were such people as Pinckwerts and Glumpe. But the
people all round (rather to my surprise) seemed to remember them
quite well, and the Professor, finding that the learned and
mysterious method left him rather at the mercy of an enemy slightly
deficient in scruples, fell back upon a more popular form of wit.
'I see,' he sneered, 'you prevail like the false pig in Aesop.'
'And you fail,' I answered, smiling, 'like the hedgehog in
Montaigne.' Need I say that there is no hedgehog in Montaigne?
'Your claptrap comes off,' he said; 'so would your beard.' I had no
intelligent answer to this, which was quite true and rather witty.
But I laughed heartily, answered, 'Like the Pantheist's boots,' at
random, and turned on my heel with all the honours of victory. The
real Professor was thrown out, but not with violence, though one
man tried very patiently to pull off his nose. He is now, I
believe, received everywhere in Europe as a delightful impostor.
His apparent earnestness and anger, you see, make him all the more
entertaining."

"Well," said Syme, "I can understand your putting on his dirty old
beard for a night's practical joke, but I don't understand your
never taking it off again."

"That is the rest of the story," said the impersonator. "When I
myself left the company, followed by reverent applause, I went
limping down the dark street, hoping that I should soon be far
enough away to be able to walk like a human being. To my
astonishment, as I was turning the corner, I felt a touch on the
shoulder, and turning, found myself under the shadow of an enormous
policeman. He told me I was wanted. I struck a sort of paralytic
attitude, and cried in a high German accent, 'Yes, I am wanted--by
the oppressed of the world. You are arresting me on the charge of
being the great anarchist, Professor de Worms.' The policeman
impassively consulted a paper in his hand, 'No, sir,' he said
civilly, 'at least, not exactly, sir. I am arresting you on the
charge of not being the celebrated anarchist, Professor de Worms.'
This charge, if it was criminal at all, was certainly the lighter
of the two, and I went along with the man, doubtful, but not
greatly dismayed. I was shown into a number of rooms, and
eventually into the presence of a police officer, who explained
that a serious campaign had been opened against the centres of
anarchy, and that this, my successful masquerade, might be of
considerable value to the public safety. He offered me a good
salary and this little blue card. Though our conversation was
short, he struck me as a man of very massive common sense and
humour; but I cannot tell you much about him personally, because--"

Syme laid down his knife and fork.

"I know," he said, "because you talked to him in a dark room."

Professor de Worms nodded and drained his glass.



CHAPTER IX

THE MAN IN SPECTACLES

"BURGUNDY is a jolly thing," said the Professor sadly, as he set
his glass down.

"You don't look as if it were," said Syme; "you drink it as if it
were medicine."

"You must excuse my manner," said the Professor dismally, "my
position is rather a curious one. Inside I am really bursting with
boyish merriment; but I acted the paralytic Professor so well, that
now I can't leave off. So that when I am among friends, and have no
need at all to disguise myself, I still can't help speaking slow
and wrinkling my forehead--just as if it were my forehead. I can be
quite happy, you understand, but only in a paralytic sort of way.
The most buoyant exclamations leap up in my heart, but they come
out of my mouth quite different. You should hear me say, 'Buck up,
old cock!' It would bring tears to your eyes."

"It does," said Syme; "but I cannot help thinking that apart from
all that you are really a bit worried."

The Professor started a little and looked at him steadily.

"You are a very clever fellow," he said, "it is a pleasure to work
with you. Yes, I have rather a heavy cloud in my head. There is a
great problem to face," and he sank his bald brow in his two hands.

Then he said in a low voice--

"Can you play the piano?"

"Yes," said Syme in simple wonder, "I'm supposed to have a good
touch."

Then, as the other did not speak, he added--

"I trust the great cloud is lifted."

After a long silence, the Professor said out of the cavernous
shadow of his hands--

"It would have done just as well if you could work a typewriter."

"Thank you," said Syme, "you flatter me."

"Listen to me," said the other, "and remember whom we have to see
tomorrow. You and I are going tomorrow to attempt something which
is very much more dangerous than trying to steal the Crown Jewels
out of the Tower. We are trying to steal a secret from a very
sharp, very strong, and very wicked man. I believe there is no man,
except the President, of course, who is so seriously startling and
formidable as that little grinning fellow in goggles. He has not
perhaps the white-hot enthusiasm unto death, the mad martyrdom for
anarchy, which marks the Secretary. But then that very fanaticism
in the Secretary has a human pathos, and is almost a redeeming
trait. But the little Doctor has a brutal sanity that is more
shocking than the Secretary's disease. Don't you notice his
detestable virility and vitality. He bounces like an india-rubber
ball. Depend on it, Sunday was not asleep (I wonder if he ever
sleeps?) when he locked up all the plans of this outrage in the
round, black head of Dr. Bull."

"And you think," said Syme, "that this unique monster will be
soothed if I play the piano to him?"

"Don't be an ass," said his mentor. "I mentioned the piano because
it gives one quick and independent fingers. Syme, if we are to go
through this interview and come out sane or alive, we must have
some code of signals between us that this brute will not see. I
have made a rough alphabetical cypher corresponding to the five
fingers--like this, see," and he rippled with his fingers on the
wooden table--"B A D, bad, a word we may frequently require."

Syme poured himself out another glass of wine, and began to study
the scheme. He was abnormally quick with his brains at puzzles,
and with his hands at conjuring, and it did not take him long to
learn how he might convey simple messages by what would seem to
be idle taps upon a table or knee. But wine and companionship had
always the effect of inspiring him to a farcical ingenuity, and
the Professor soon found himself struggling with the too vast
energy of the new language, as it passed through the heated brain
of Syme.

"We must have several word-signs," said Syme seriously--"words that
we are likely to want, fine shades of meaning. My favourite word is
'coeval'. What's yours?"

"Do stop playing the goat," said the Professor plaintively. "You
don't know how serious this is."

"'Lush' too," said Syme, shaking his head sagaciously, "we must
have 'lush'--word applied to grass, don't you know?"

"Do you imagine," asked the Professor furiously, "that we are going
to talk to Dr. Bull about grass?"

"There are several ways in which the subject could be approached,"
said Syme reflectively, "and the word introduced without appearing
forced. We might say, 'Dr. Bull, as a revolutionist, you remember
that a tyrant once advised us to eat grass; and indeed many of us,
looking on the fresh lush grass of summer"'

"Do you understand," said the other, "that this is a tragedy?"

"Perfectly," replied Syme; "always be comic in a tragedy. What
the deuce else can you do? I wish this language of yours had a
wider scope. I suppose we could not extend it from the fingers
to the toes? That would involve pulling off our boots and socks
during the conversation, which however unobtrusively performed--"

"Syme," said his friend with a stern simplicity, "go to bed!"

Syme, however, sat up in bed for a considerable time mastering the
new code. He was awakened next morning while the east was still
sealed with darkness, and found his grey-bearded ally standing like
a ghost beside his bed.

Syme sat up in bed blinking; then slowly collected his thoughts,
threw off the bed-clothes, and stood up. It seemed to him in some
curious way that all the safety and sociability of the night before
fell with the bedclothes off him, and he stood up in an air of cold
danger. He still felt an entire trust and loyalty towards his
companion; but it was the trust between two men going to the
scaffold.

"Well," said Syme with a forced cheerfulness as he pulled on his
trousers, "I dreamt of that alphabet of yours. Did it take you
long to make it up?"

The Professor made no answer, but gazed in front of him with eyes
the colour of a wintry sea; so Syme repeated his question.

"I say, did it take you long to invent all this? I'm considered
good at these things, and it was a good hour's grind. Did you
learn it all on the spot?"

The Professor was silent; his eyes were wide open, and he wore a
fixed but very small smile.

"How long did it take you?"

The Professor did not move.

"Confound you, can't you answer?" called out Syme, in a sudden
anger that had something like fear underneath. Whether or no the
Professor could answer, he did not.

Syme stood staring back at the stiff face like parchment and the
blank, blue eyes. His first thought was that the Professor had gone
mad, but his second thought was more frightful. After all, what did
he know about this queer creature whom he had heedlessly accepted
as a friend? What did he know, except that the man had been at the
anarchist breakfast and had told him a ridiculous tale? How
improbable it was that there should be another friend there beside
Gogol! Was this man's silence a sensational way of declaring war?
Was this adamantine stare after all only the awful sneer of some
threefold traitor, who had turned for the last time? He stood and
strained his ears in this heartless silence. He almost fancied he
could hear dynamiters come to capture him shifting softly in the
corridor outside.

Then his eye strayed downwards, and he burst out laughing. Though
the Professor himself stood there as voiceless as a statue, his
five dumb fingers were dancing alive upon the dead table. Syme
watched the twinkling movements of the talking hand, and read
clearly the message--

"I will only talk like this. We must get used to it."

He rapped out the answer with the impatience of relief--

"All right. Let's get out to breakfast."

They took their hats and sticks in silence; but as Syme took his
sword-stick, he held it hard.

They paused for a few minutes only to stuff down coffee and coarse
thick sandwiches at a coffee stall, and then made their way across
the river, which under the grey and growing light looked as
desolate as Acheron. They reached the bottom of the huge block of
buildings which they had seen from across the river, and began in
silence to mount the naked and numberless stone steps, only pausing
now and then to make short remarks on the rail of the banisters. At
about every other flight they passed a window; each window showed
them a pale and tragic dawn lifting itself laboriously over London.
From each the innumerable roofs of slate looked like the leaden
surges of a grey, troubled sea after rain. Syme was increasingly
conscious that his new adventure had somehow a quality of cold
sanity worse than the wild adventures of the past. Last night, for
instance, the tall tenements had seemed to him like a tower in a
dream. As he now went up the weary and perpetual steps, he was
daunted and bewildered by their almost infinite series. But it was
not the hot horror of a dream or of anything that might be
exaggeration or delusion. Their infinity was more like the empty
infinity of arithmetic, something unthinkable, yet necessary to
thought. Or it was like the stunning statements of astronomy about
the distance of the fixed stars. He was ascending the house of
reason, a thing more hideous than unreason itself.

By the time they reached Dr. Bull's landing, a last window showed
them a harsh, white dawn edged with banks of a kind of coarse red,
more like red clay than red cloud. And when they entered Dr. Bull's
bare garret it was full of light.

Syme had been haunted by a half historic memory in connection with
these empty rooms and that austere daybreak. The moment he saw the
garret and Dr. Bull sitting writing at a table, he remembered what
the memory was--the French Revolution. There should have been the
black outline of a guillotine against that heavy red and white of
the morning. Dr. Bull was in his white shirt and black breeches
only; his cropped, dark head might well have just come out of its
wig; he might have been Marat or a more slipshod Robespierre.

Yet when he was seen properly, the French fancy fell away. The
Jacobins were idealists; there was about this man a murderous
materialism. His Dosition gave him a somewhat new appearance. The
strong, white light of morning coming from one side creating sharp
shadows, made him seem both more pale and more angular than he had
looked at the breakfast on the balcony. Thus the two black glasses
that encased his eyes might really have been black cavities in his
skull, making him look like a death's-head. And, indeed, if ever
Death himself sat writing at a wooden table, it might have been he.

He looked up and smiled brightly enough as the men came in, and
rose with the resilient rapidity of which the Professor had
spoken. He set chairs for both of them, and going to a peg behind
the door, proceeded to put on a coat and waistcoat of rough, dark
tweed; he buttoned it up neatly, and came back to sit down at his
table.

The quiet good humour of his manner left his two opponents
helpless. It was with some momentary difficulty that the
Professor broke silence and began, "I'm sorry to disturb you so
early, comrade," said he, with a careful resumption of the slow
de Worms manner. "You have no doubt made all the arrangements for
the Paris affair?" Then he added with infinite slowness, "We have
information which renders intolerable anything in the nature of a
moment's delay."

Dr. Bull smiled again, but continued to gaze on them without
speaking. The Professor resumed, a pause before each weary word--

"Please do not think me excessively abrupt; but I advise you to
alter those plans, or if it is too late for that, to follow your
agent with all the support you can get for him. Comrade Syme and
I have had an experience which it would take more time to recount
than we can afford, if we are to act on it. I will, however,
relate the occurrence in detail, even at the risk of losing time,
if you really feel that it is essential to the understanding of
the problem we have to discuss."

He was spinning out his sentences, making them intolerably long
and lingering, in the hope of maddening the practical little
Doctor into an explosion of impatience which might show his hand.
But the little Doctor continued only to stare and smile, and the
monologue was uphill work. Syme began to feel a new sickness and
despair. The Doctor's smile and silence were not at all like the
cataleptic stare and horrible silence which he had confronted in
the Professor half an hour before. About the Professor's makeup
and all his antics there was always something merely grotesque,
like a gollywog. Syme remembered those wild woes of yesterday as
one remembers being afraid of Bogy in childhood. But here was
daylight; here was a healthy, square-shouldered man in tweeds,
not odd save for the accident of his ugly spectacles, not glaring
or grinning at all, but smiling steadily and not saying a word.
The whole had a sense of unbearable reality. Under the increasing
sunlight the colours of the Doctor's complexion, the pattern of
his tweeds, grew and expanded outrageously, as such things grow
too important in a realistic novel. But his smile was quite
slight, the pose of his head polite; the only uncanny thing was
his silence.

"As I say," resumed the Professor, like a man toiling through
heavy sand, "the incident that has occurred to us and has led
us to ask for information about the Marquis, is one which you
may think it better to have narrated; but as it came in the
way of Comrade Syme rather than me--"

His words he seemed to be dragging out like words in an anthem;
but Syme, who was watching, saw his long fingers rattle quickly
on the edge of the crazy table. He read the message, "You must
go on. This devil has sucked me dry!"

Syme plunged into the breach with that bravado of improvisation
which always came to him when he was alarmed.

"Yes, the thing really happened to me," he said hastily. "I had
the good fortune to fall into conversation with a detective who
took me, thanks to my hat, for a respectable person. Wishing to
clinch my reputation for respectability, I took him and made him
very drunk at the Savoy. Under this influence he became friendly,
and told me in so many words that within a day or two they hope
to arrest the Marquis in France.

So unless you or I can get on his track--"

The Doctor was still smiling in the most friendly way, and his
protected eyes were still impenetrable. The Professor signalled to
Syme that he would resume his explanation, and he began again with
the same elaborate calm.

"Syme immediately brought this information to me, and we came here
together to see what use you would be inclined to make of it. It
seems to me unquestionably urgent that--"

All this time Syme had been staring at the Doctor almost as
steadily as the Doctor stared at the Professor, but quite without
the smile. The nerves of both comrades-in-arms were near snapping
under that strain of motionless amiability, when Syme suddenly
leant forward and idly tapped the edge of the table. His message
to his ally ran, "I have an intuition."

The Professor, with scarcely a pause in his monologue, signalled
back, "Then sit on it."

Syme telegraphed, "It is quite extraordinary."

The other answered, "Extraordinary rot!"

Syme said, "I am a poet."

The other retorted, "You are a dead man."

Syme had gone quite red up to his yellow hair, and his eyes were
burning feverishly. As he said he had an intuition, and it had
risen to a sort of lightheaded certainty. Resuming his symbolic
taps, he signalled to his friend, "You scarcely realise how poetic
my intuition is. It has that sudden quality we sometimes feel in
the coming of spring."

He then studied the answer on his friend's fingers. The answer
was, "Go to hell! "

The Professor then resumed his merely verbal monologue addressed
to the Doctor.

"Perhaps I should rather say," said Syme on his fingers, "that it
resembles that sudden smell of the sea which may be found in the
heart of lush woods."

His companion disdained to reply.

"Or yet again," tapped Syme, "it is positive, as is the passionate
red hair of a beautiful woman."

The Professor was continuing his speech, but in the middle of it
Syme decided to act. He leant across the table, and said in a
voice that could not be neglected--

"Dr. Bull!"

The Doctor's sleek and smiling head did not move, but they could
have sworn that under his dark glasses his eyes darted towards
Syme.

"Dr. Bull," said Syme, in a voice peculiarly precise and
courteous, "would you do me a small favour? Would you be so kind
as to take off your spectacles?"

The Professor swung round on his seat, and stared at Syme with a
sort of frozen fury of astonishment. Syme, like a man who has
thrown his life and fortune on the table, leaned forward with a
fiery face. The Doctor did not move.

For a few seconds there was a silence in which one could hear a
pin drop, split once by the single hoot of a distant steamer on
the Thames. Then Dr. Bull rose slowly, still smiling, and took
off his spectacles.

Syme sprang to his feet, stepping backwards a little, like a
chemical lecturer from a successful explosion. His eyes were like
stars, and for an instant he could only point without speaking.

The Professor had also started to his feet, forgetful of his
supposed paralysis. He leant on the back of the chair and stared
doubtfully at Dr. Bull, as if the Doctor had been turned into a
toad before his eyes. And indeed it was almost as great a
transformation scene.

The two detectives saw sitting in the chair before them a very
boyish-looking young man, with very frank and happy hazel eyes, an
open expression, cockney clothes like those of a city clerk, and
an unquestionable breath about him of being very good and rather
commonplace. The smile was still there, but it might have been the
first smile of a baby.

"I knew I was a poet," cried Syme in a sort of ecstasy. "I knew my
intuition was as infallible as the Pope. It was the spectacles that
did it! It was all the spectacles. Given those beastly black eyes,
and all the rest of him his health and his jolly looks, made him a
live devil among dead ones."

"It certainly does make a queer difference," said the Professor
shakily. "But as regards the project of Dr. Bull--"

"Project be damned!" roared Syme, beside himself. "Look at him!
Look at his face, look at his collar, look at his blessed boots!
You don't suppose, do you, that that thing's an anarchist?"

"Syme!" cried the other in an apprehensive agony.

"Why, by God," said Syme, "I'll take the risk of that myself! Dr.
Bull, I am a police officer. There's my card," and he flung down
the blue card upon the table.

The Professor still feared that all was lost; but he was loyal. He
pulled out his own official card and put it beside his friend's.
Then the third man burst out laughing, and for the first time that
morning they heard his voice.

"I'm awfully glad you chaps have come so early," he said, with
a sort of schoolboy flippancy, "for we can all start for France
together. Yes, I'm in the force right enough," and he flicked a
blue card towards them lightly as a matter of form.

Clapping a brisk bowler on his head and resuming his goblin
glasses, the Doctor moved so quickly towards the door, that the
others instinctively followed him. Syme seemed a little distrait,
and as he passed under the doorway he suddenly struck his stick
on the stone passage so that it rang.

"But Lord God Almighty," he cried out, "if this is all right, there
were more damned detectives than there were damned dynamiters at
the damned Council!"

"We might have fought easily," said Bull; "we were four against
three."

The Professor was descending the stairs, but his voice came up from
below.

"No," said the voice, "we were not four against three--we were not
so lucky. We were four against One."

The others went down the stairs in silence.

The young man called Bull, with an innocent courtesy characteristic
of him, insisted on going last until they reached the street; but
there his own robust rapidity asserted itself unconsciously, and he
walked quickly on ahead towards a railway inquiry office, talking
to the others over his shoulder.

"It is jolly to get some pals," he said. "I've been half dead with
the jumps, being quite alone. I nearly flung my arms round Gogol
and embraced him, which would have been imprudent. I hope you won't
despise me for having been in a blue funk."

"All the blue devils in blue hell," said Syme, "contributed to my
blue funk! But the worst devil was you and your infernal goggles."

The young man laughed delightedly.

"Wasn't it a rag?" he said. "Such a simple idea--not my own. I
haven't got the brains. You see, I wanted to go into the detective
service, especially the anti-dynamite business. But for that
purpose they wanted someone to dress up as a dynamiter; and they
all swore by blazes that I could never look like a dynamiter. They
said my very walk was respectable, and that seen from behind I
looked like the British Constitution. They said I looked too
healthy and too optimistic, and too reliable and benevolent; they
called me all sorts of names at Scotland Yard. They said that if I
had been a criminal, I might have made my fortune by looking so
like an honest man; but as I had the misfortune to be an honest
man, there was not even the remotest chance of my assisting them by
ever looking like a criminal. But as last I was brought before some
old josser who was high up in the force, and who seemed to have no
end of a head on his shoulders. And there the others all talked
hopelessly. One asked whether a bushy beard would hide my nice
smile; another said that if they blacked my face I might look like
a negro anarchist; but this old chap chipped in with a most
extraordinary remark. 'A pair of smoked spectacles will do it,' he
said positively. 'Look at him now; he looks like an angelic office
boy. Put him on a pair of smoked spectacles, and children will
scream at the sight of him.' And so it was, by George! When once my
eyes were covered, all the rest, smile and big shoulders and short
hair, made me look a perfect little devil. As I say, it was simple
enough when it was done, like miracles; but that wasn't the really
miraculous part of it. There was one really staggering thing about
the business, and my head still turns at it."

"What was that?" asked Syme.

"I'll tell you," answered the man in spectacles. "This big pot in
the police who sized me up so that he knew how the goggles would
go with my hair and socks--by God, he never saw me at all!"

Syme's eyes suddenly flashed on him.

"How was that?" he asked. "I thought you talked to him."

"So I did," said Bull brightly; "but we talked in a pitch-dark
room like a coalcellar. There, you would never have guessed that."

"I could not have conceived it," said Syme gravely.

"It is indeed a new idea," said the Professor.

Their new ally was in practical matters a whirlwind. At the
inquiry office he asked with businesslike brevity about the trains
for Dover. Having got his information, he bundled the company into
a cab, and put them and himself inside a railway carriage before
they had properly realised the breathless process. They were
already on the Calais boat before conversation flowed freely.

"I had already arranged," he explained, "to go to France for my
lunch; but I am delighted to have someone to lunch with me. You
see, I had to send that beast, the Marquis, over with his bomb,
because the President had his eye on me, though God knows how.
I'll tell you the story some day. It was perfectly choking.
Whenever I tried to slip out of it I saw the President somewhere,
smiling out of the bow-window of a club, or taking off his hat to
me from the top of an omnibus. I tell you, you can say what you
like, that fellow sold himself to the devil; he can be in six
places at once."

"So you sent the Marquis off, I understand," asked the Professor.
"Was it long ago? Shall we be in time to catch him?"

"Yes," answered the new guide, "I've timed it all. He'll still be
at Calais when we arrive."

"But when we do catch him at Calais," said the Professor, "what are
we going to do?"

At this question the countenance of Dr. Bull fell for the first
time. He reflected a little, and then said--

"Theoretically, I suppose, we ought to call the police."

"Not I," said Syme. "Theoretically I ought to drown myself first. I
promised a poor fellow, who was a real modern pessimist, on my word
of honour not to tell the police. I'm no hand at casuistry, but I
can't break my word to a modern pessimist. It's like breaking one's
word to a child."

"I'm in the same boat," said the Professor. "I tried to tell the
police and I couldn't, because of some silly oath I took. You see,
when I was an actor I was a sort of all-round beast. Perjury or
treason is the only crime I haven't committed. If I did that I
shouldn't know the difference between right and wrong."

"I've been through all that," said Dr. Bull, "and I've made up my
mind. I gave my promise to the Secretary--you know him, man who
smiles upside down. My friends, that man is the most utterly
unhappy man that was ever human. It may be his digestion, or his
conscience, or his nerves, or his philosophy of the universe, but
he's damned, he's in hell! Well, I can't turn on a man like that,
and hunt him down. It's like whipping a leper. I may be mad, but
that's how I feel; and there's jolly well the end of it."

"I don't think you're mad," said Syme. "I knew you would decide
like that when first you--"

"Eh?" said Dr. Bull.

"When first you took off your spectacles."

Dr. Bull smiled a little, and strolled across the deck to look at
the sunlit sea. Then he strolled back again, kicking his heels
carelessly, and a companionable silence fell between the three men.

"Well," said Syme, "it seems that we have all the same kind of
morality or immorality, so we had better face the fact that comes
of it."

"Yes," assented the Professor, "you're quite right; and we must
hurry up, for I can see the Grey Nose standing out from France."

"The fact that comes of it," said Syme seriously, "is this, that we
three are alone on this planet. Gogol has gone, God knows where;
perhaps the President has smashed him like a fly. On the Council we
are three men against three, like the Romans who held the bridge.
But we are worse off than that, first because they can appeal to
their organization and we cannot appeal to ours, and second
because--"

"Because one of those other three men," said the Professor, "is not
a man."

Syme nodded and was silent for a second or two, then he said--

"My idea is this. We must do something to keep the Marquis in
Calais till tomorrow midday. I have turned over twenty schemes in
my head. We cannot denounce him as a dynamiter; that is agreed. We
cannot get him detained on some trivial charge, for we should have
to appear; he knows us, and he would smell a rat. We cannot pretend
to keep him on anarchist business; he might swallow much in that
way, but not the notion of stopping in Calais while the Czar went
safely through Paris. We might try to kidnap him, and lock him up
ourselves; but he is a well-known man here. He has a whole
bodyguard of friends; he is very strong and brave, and the event is
doubtful. The only thing I can see to do is actually to take
advantage of the very things that are in the Marquis's favour. I am
going to profit by the fact that he is a highly respected nobleman.
I am going to profit by the fact that he has many friends and moves
in the best society."

"What the devil are you talking about?" asked the Professor.

"The Symes are first mentioned in the fourteenth century," said
Syme; "but there is a tradition that one of them rode behind Bruce
at Bannockburn. Since 1350 the tree is quite clear."

"He's gone off his head," said the little Doctor, staring.

"Our bearings," continued Syme calmly, "are 'argent a chevron gules
charged with three cross crosslets of the field.' The motto
varies."

The Professor seized Syme roughly by the waistcoat.

"We are just inshore," he said. "Are you seasick or joking in the
wrong place?"

"My remarks are almost painfully practical," answered Syme, in an
unhurried manner. "The house of St. Eustache also is very ancient.
The Marquis cannot deny that he is a gentleman. He cannot deny
that I am a gentleman. And in order to put the matter of my social
position quite beyond a doubt, I propose at the earliest
opportunity to knock his hat off. But here we are in the harbour."

They went on shore under the strong sun in a sort of daze. Syme,
who had now taken the lead as Bull had taken it in London, led
them along a kind of marine parade until he came to some cafes,
embowered in a bulk of greenery and overlooking the sea. As he
went before them his step was slightly swaggering, and he swung
his stick like a sword. He was making apparently for the extreme
end of the line of cafes, but he stopped abruptly. With a sharp
gesture he motioned them to silence, but he pointed with one
gloved finger to a cafe table under a bank of flowering foliage
at which sat the Marquis de St. Eustache, his teeth shining in
his thick, black beard, and his bold, brown face shadowed by a
light yellow straw hat and outlined against the violet sea.



CHAPTER X

THE DUEL

SYME sat down at a cafe table with his companions, his blue eyes
sparkling like the bright sea below, and ordered a bottle of
Saumur with a pleased impatience. He was for some reason in a
condition of curious hilarity. His spirits were already
unnaturally high; they rose as the Saumur sank, and in half an
hour his talk was a torrent of nonsense. He professed to be
making out a plan of the conversation which was going to ensue
between himself and the deadly Marquis. He jotted it down wildly
with a pencil. It was arranged like a printed catechism, with
questions and answers, and was delivered with an extraordinary
rapidity of utterance.

"I shall approach. Before taking off his hat, I shall take off my
own. I shall say, 'The Marquis de Saint Eustache, I believe.' He
will say, 'The celebrated Mr. Syme, I presume.' He will say in the
most exquisite French, 'How are you?' I shall reply in the most
exquisite Cockney, 'Oh, just the Syme--' "

"Oh, shut it," said the man in spectacles. "Pull yourself
together, and chuck away that bit of paper. What are you really
going to do?"

"But it was a lovely catechism," said Syme pathetically. "Do let
me read it you. It has only forty-three questions and answers, and
some of the Marquis's answers are wonderfully witty. I like to be
just to my enemy."

"But what's the good of it all?" asked Dr. Bull in exasperation.

"It leads up to my challenge, don't you see," said Syme, beaming.
"When the Marquis has given the thirty-ninth reply, which runs--"

"Has it by any chance occurred to you," asked the Professor, with
a ponderous simplicity, "that the Marquis may not say all the
forty-three things you have put down for him? In that case, I
understand, your own epigrams may appear somewhat more forced."

Syme struck the table with a radiant face.

"Why, how true that is," he said, "and I never thought of it. Sir,
you have an intellect beyond the common. You will make a name."

"Oh, you're as drunk as an owl!" said the Doctor.

"It only remains," continued Syme quite unperturbed, "to adopt
some other method of breaking the ice (if I may so express it)
between myself and the man I wish to kill. And since the course of
a dialogue cannot be predicted by one of its parties alone (as you
have pointed out with such recondite acumen), the only thing to be
done, I suppose, is for the one party, as far as possible, to do
all the dialogue by himself. And so I will, by George!" And he
stood up suddenly, his yellow hair blowing in the slight sea
breeze.

A band was playing in a cafe chantant hidden somewhere among the
trees, and a woman had just stopped singing. On Syme's heated head
the bray of the brass band seemed like the jar and jingle of that
barrel-organ in Leicester Square, to the tune of which he had once
stood up to die. He looked across to the little table where the
Marquis sat. The man had two companions now, solemn Frenchmen in
frock-coats and silk hats, one of them with the red rosette of the
Legion of Honour, evidently people of a solid social position.
Besides these black, cylindrical costumes, the Marquis, in his
loose straw hat and light spring clothes, looked Bohemian and even
barbaric; but he looked the Marquis. Indeed, one might say that he
looked the king, with his animal elegance, his scornful eyes, and
his proud head lifted against the purple sea. But he was no
Christian king, at any rate; he was, rather, some swarthy despot,
half Greek, half Asiatic, who in the days when slavery seemed
natural looked down on the Mediterranean, on his galley and his
groaning slaves. Just so, Syme thought, would the brown-gold face
of such a tyrant have shown against the dark green olives and the
burning blue.

"Are you going to address the meeting?" asked the Professor
peevishly, seeing that Syme still stood up without moving.

Syme drained his last glass of sparkling wine.

"I am," he said, pointing across to the Marquis and his companions,
"that meeting. That meeting displeases me. I am going to pull that
meeting's great ugly, mahogany-coloured nose."

He stepped across swiftly, if not quite steadily. The Marquis,
seeing him, arched his black Assyrian eyebrows in surprise, but
smiled politely.

"You are Mr. Syme, I think," he said.

Syme bowed.

"And you are the Marquis de Saint Eustache," he said gracefully.
"Permit me to pull your nose."

He leant over to do so, but the Marquis started backwards,
upsetting his chair, and the two men in top hats held Syme back
by the shoulders.

"This man has insulted me!" said Syme, with gestures of
explanation.

"Insulted you?" cried the gentleman with the red rosette, "when?"

"Oh, just now," said Syme recklessly. "He insulted my mother."

"Insulted your mother!" exclaimed the gentleman incredulously.

"Well, anyhow," said Syme, conceding a point, "my aunt."

"But how can the Marquis have insulted your aunt just now?" said
the second gentleman with some legitimate wonder. "He has been
sitting here all the time."

"Ah, it was what he said!" said Syme darkly.

"I said nothing at all," said the Marquis, "except something
about the band. I only said that I liked Wagner played well."

"It was an allusion to my family," said Syme firmly. "My aunt
played Wagner badly. It was a painful subject. We are always
being insulted about it."

"This seems most extraordinary," said the gentleman who was
decore, looking doubtfully at the Marquis.

"Oh, I assure you," said Syme earnestly, "the whole of your
conversation was simply packed with sinister allusions to my
aunt's weaknesses."

"This is nonsense!" said the second gentleman. "I for one have
said nothing for half an hour except that I liked the singing of
that girl with black hair."

"Well, there you are again!" said Syme indignantly. "My aunt's was
red."

"It seems to me," said the other, "that you are simply seeking a
pretext to insult the Marquis."

"By George!" said Syme, facing round and looking at him, "what a
clever chap you are!"

The Marquis started up with eyes flaming like a tiger's.

"Seeking a quarrel with me!" he cried. "Seeking a fight with me! By
God! there was never a man who had to seek long. These gentlemen
will perhaps act for me. There are still four hours of daylight.
Let us fight this evening."

Syme bowed with a quite beautiful graciousness.

"Marquis," he said, "your action is worthy of your fame and blood.
Permit me to consult for a moment with the gentlemen in whose
hands I shall place myself."

In three long strides he rejoined his companions, and they, who
had seen his champagne-inspired attack and listened to his idiotic
explanations, were quite startled at the look of him. For now that
he came back to them he was quite sober, a little pale, and he
spoke in a low voice of passionate practicality.

"I have done it," he said hoarsely. "I have fixed a fight on the
beast. But look here, and listen carefully. There is no time for
talk. You are my seconds, and everything must come from you. Now
you must insist, and insist absolutely, on the duel coming off
after seven tomorrow, so as to give me the chance of preventing him
from catching the 7.45 for Paris. If he misses that he misses his
crime. He can't refuse to meet you on such a small point of time
and place. But this is what he will do. He will choose a field
somewhere near a wayside station, where he can pick up the train.
He is a very good swordsman, and he will trust to killing me in
time to catch it. But I can fence well too, and I think I can keep
him in play, at any rate, until the train is lost. Then perhaps he
may kill me to console his feelings. You understand? Very well
then, let me introduce you to some charming friends of mine," and
leading them quickly across the parade, he presented them to the
Marquis's seconds by two very aristocratic names of which they had
not previously heard.

Syme was subject to spasms of singular common sense, not otherwise
a part of his character. They were (as he said of his impulse about
the spectacles) poetic intuitions, and they sometimes rose to the
exaltation of prophecy.

He had correctly calculated in this case the policy of his
opponent. When the Marquis was informed by his seconds that Syme
could only fight in the morning, he must fully have realised that
an obstacle had suddenly arisen between him and his bomb-throwing
business in the capital. Naturally he could not explain this
objection to his friends, so he chose the course which Syme had
predicted. He induced his seconds to settle on a small meadow not
far from the railway, and he trusted to the fatality of the first
engagement.

When he came down very coolly to the field of honour, no one could
have guessed that he had any anxiety about a journey; his hands
were in his pockets, his straw hat on the back of his head, his
handsome face brazen in the sun. But it might have struck a
stranger as odd that there appeared in his train, not only his
seconds carrying the sword-case, but two of his servants carrying
a portmanteau and a luncheon basket.

Early as was the hour, the sun soaked everything in warmth, and
Syme was vaguely surprised to see so many spring flowers burning
gold and silver in the tall grass in which the whole company stood
almost knee-deep.

With the exception of the Marquis, all the men were in sombre and
solemn morning-dress, with hats like black chimney-pots; the little
Doctor especially, with the addition of his black spectacles,
looked like an undertaker in a farce. Syme could not help feeling a
comic contrast between this funereal church parade of apparel and
the rich and glistening meadow, growing wild flowers everywhere.
But, indeed, this comic contrast between the yellow blossoms and
the black hats was but a symbol of the tragic contrast between the
yellow blossoms and the black business. On his right was a little
wood; far away to his left lay the long curve of the railway line,
which he was, so to speak, guarding from the Marquis, whose goal
and escape it was. In front of him, behind the black group of his
opponents, he could see, like a tinted cloud, a small almond bush
in flower against the faint line of the sea.

The member of the Legion of Honour, whose name it seemed was
Colonel Ducroix, approached the Professor and Dr. Bull with great
politeness, and suggested that the play should terminate with the
first considerable hurt.

Dr. Bull, however, having been carefully coached by Syme upon this
point of policy, insisted, with great dignity and in very bad
French, that it should continue until one of the combatants was
disabled. Syme had made up his mind that he could avoid disabling
the Marquis and prevent the Marquis from disabling him for at
least twenty minutes. In twenty minutes the Paris train would have
gone by.

"To a man of the well-known skill and valour of Monsieur de St.
Eustache," said the Professor solemnly, "it must be a matter of
indifference which method is adopted, and our principal has strong
reasons for demanding the longer encounter, reasons the delicacy
of which prevent me from being explicit, but for the just and
honourable nature of which I can--"

"Peste!" broke from the Marquis behind, whose face had suddenly
darkened, "let us stop talking and begin," and he slashed off the
head of a tall flower with his stick.

Syme understood his rude impatience and instinctively looked over
his shoulder to see whether the train was coming in sight. But
there was no smoke on the horizon.

Colonel Ducroix knelt down and unlocked the case, taking out a
pair of twin swords, which took the sunlight and turned to two
streaks of white fire. He offered one to the Marquis, who snatched
it without ceremony, and another to Syme, who took it, bent it,
and poised it with as much delay as was consistent with dignity.

Then the Colonel took out another pair of blades, and taking one
himself and giving another to Dr. Bull, proceeded to place the
men.

Both combatants had thrown off their coats and waistcoats, and
stood sword in hand. The seconds stood on each side of the line
of fight with drawn swords also, but still sombre in their dark
frock-coats and hats. The principals saluted. The Colonel said
quietly, "Engage!" and the two blades touched and tingled.

When the jar of the joined iron ran up Syme's arm, all the
fantastic fears that have been the subject of this story fell
from him like dreams from a man waking up in bed. He remembered
them clearly and in order as mere delusions of the nerves--how
the fear of the Professor had been the fear of the tyrannic
accidents of nightmare, and how the fear of the Doctor had been
the fear of the airless vacuum of science. The first was the old
fear that any miracle might happen, the second the more hopeless
modern fear that no miracle can ever happen. But he saw that
these fears were fancies, for he found himself in the presence of
the great fact of the fear of death, with its coarse and pitiless
common sense. He felt like a man who had dreamed all night of
falling over precipices, and had woke up on the morning when he
was to be hanged. For as soon as he had seen the sunlight run
down the channel of his foe's foreshortened blade, and as soon as
he had felt the two tongues of steel touch, vibrating like two
living things, he knew that his enemy was a terrible fighter, and
that probably his last hour had come.

He felt a strange and vivid value in all the earth around him, in
the grass under his feet; he felt the love of life in all living
things. He could almost fancy that he heard the grass growing; he
could almost fancy that even as he stood fresh flowers were
springing up and breaking into blossom in the meadow--flowers blood
red and burning gold and blue, fulfilling the whole pageant of the
spring. And whenever his eyes strayed for a flash from the calm,
staring, hypnotic eyes of the Marquis, they saw the little tuft of
almond tree against the sky-line. He had the feeling that if by
some miracle he escaped he would be ready to sit for ever before
that almond tree, desiring nothing else in the world.

But while earth and sky and everything had the living beauty of a
thing lost, the other half of his head was as clear as glass, and
he was parrying his enemy's point with a kind of clockwork skill of
which he had hardly supposed himself capable. Once his enemy's
point ran along his wrist, leaving a slight streak of blood, but it
either was not noticed or was tacitly ignored. Every now and then
he riposted, and once or twice he could almost fancy that he felt
his point go home, but as there was no blood on blade or shirt he
supposed he was mistaken. Then came an interruption and a change.

At the risk of losing all, the Marquis, interrupting his quiet
stare, flashed one glance over his shoulder at the line of railway
on his right. Then he turned on Syme a face transfigured to that of
a fiend, and began to fight as if with twenty weapons. The attack
came so fast and furious, that the one shining sword seemed a
shower of shining arrows. Syme had no chance to look at the
railway; but also he had no need. He could guess the reason of the
Marquis's sudden madness of battle--the Paris train was in sight.

But the Marquis's morbid energy over-reached itself. Twice Syme,
parrying, knocked his opponent's point far out of the fighting
circle; and the third time his riposte was so rapid, that there
was no doubt about the hit this time. Syme's sword actually bent
under the weight of the Marquis's body, which it had pierced.

Syme was as certain that he had stuck his blade into his enemy as
a gardener that he has stuck his spade into the ground. Yet the
Marquis sprang back from the stroke without a stagger, and Syme
stood staring at his own sword-point like an idiot. There was no
blood on it at all.

There was an instant of rigid silence, and then Syme in his turn
fell furiously on the other, filled with a flaming curiosity. The
Marquis was probably, in a general sense, a better fencer than he,
as he had surmised at the beginning, but at the moment the Marquis
seemed distraught and at a disadvantage. He fought wildly and even
weakly, and he constantly looked away at the railway line, almost
as if he feared the train more than the pointed steel. Syme, on the
other hand, fought fiercely but still carefully, in an intellectual
fury, eager to solve the riddle of his own bloodless sword. For
this purpose, he aimed less at the Marquis's body, and more at his
throat and head. A minute and a half afterwards he felt his point
enter the man's neck below the jaw. It came out clean. Half mad, he
thrust again, and made what should have been a bloody scar on the
Marquis's cheek. But there was no scar.

For one moment the heaven of Syme again grew black with
supernatural terrors. Surely the man had a charmed life. But this
new spiritual dread was a more awful thing than had been the mere
spiritual topsy-turvydom symbolised by the paralytic who pursued
him. The Professor was only a goblin; this man was a devil--perhaps
he was the Devil! Anyhow, this was certain, that three times had a
human sword been driven into him and made no mark. When Syme had
that thought he drew himself up, and all that was good in him sang
high up in the air as a high wind sings in the trees. He thought of
all the human things in his story--of the Chinese lanterns in
Saffron Park, of the girl's red hair in the garden, of the honest,
beer-swilling sailors down by the dock, of his loyal companions
standing by. Perhaps he had been chosen as a champion of all these
fresh and kindly things to cross swords with the enemy of all
creation. "After all," he said to himself, "I am more than a devil;
I am a man. I can do the one thing which Satan himself cannot do--I
can die," and as the word went through his head, he heard a faint
and far-off hoot, which would soon be the roar of the Paris train.

He fell to fighting again with a supernatural levity, like a
Mohammedan panting for Paradise. As the train came nearer and
nearer he fancied he could see people putting up the floral
arches in Paris; he joined in the growing noise and the glory of
the great Republic whose gate he was guarding against Hell. His
thoughts rose higher and higher with the rising roar of the
train, which ended, as if proudly, in a long and piercing
whistle. The train stopped.

Suddenly, to the astonishment of everyone the Marquis sprang back
quite out of sword reach and threw down his sword. The leap was
wonderful, and not the less wonderful because Syme had plunged his
sword a moment before into the man's thigh.

"Stop!" said the Marquis in a voice that compelled a momentary
obedience. "I want to say something."

"What is the matter?" asked Colonel Ducroix, staring. "Has there
been foul play?"

"There has been foul play somewhere," said Dr. Bull, who was a
little pale. "Our principal has wounded the Marquis four times
at least, and he is none the worse ."

The Marquis put up his hand with a curious air of ghastly
patience.

"Please let me speak," he said. "It is rather important. Mr.
Syme," he continued, turning to his opponent, "we are fighting
today, if I remember right, because you expressed a wish (which
I thought irrational) to pull my nose. Would you oblige me by
pulling my nose now as quickly as possible? I have to catch a
train."

"I protest that this is most irregular," said Dr. Bull
indignantly.

"It is certainly somewhat opposed to precedent," said Colonel
Ducroix, looking wistfully at his principal. "There is, I think,
one case on record (Captain Bellegarde and the Baron Zumpt) in
which the weapons were changed in the middle of the encounter at
the request of one of the combatants. But one can hardly call
one's nose a weapon."

"Will you or will you not pull my nose?" said the Marquis in
exasperation. "Come, come, Mr. Syme! You wanted to do it, do it!
You can have no conception of how important it is to me. Don't be
so selfish! Pull my nose at once, when I ask you!" and he bent
slightly forward with a fascinating smile. The Paris train,
panting and groaning, had grated into a little station behind the
neighbouring hill.

Syme had the feeling he had more than once had in these adventures
--the sense that a horrible and sublime wave lifted to heaven was
just toppling over. Walking in a world he half understood, he took
two paces forward and seized the Roman nose of this remarkable
nobleman. He pulled it hard, and it came off in his hand.

He stood for some seconds with a foolish solemnity, with the
pasteboard proboscis still between his fingers, looking at it,
while the sun and the clouds and the wooded hills looked down
upon this imbecile scene.

The Marquis broke the silence in a loud and cheerful voice.

"If anyone has any use for my left eyebrow," he said, "he can have
it. Colonel Ducroix, do accept my left eyebrow! It's the kind of
thing that might come in useful any day," and he gravely tore off
one of his swarthy Assyrian brows, bringing about half his brown
forehead with it, and politely offered it to the Colonel, who
stood crimson and speechless with rage.

"If I had known," he spluttered, "that I was acting for a poltroon
who pads himself to fight--"

"Oh, I know, I know!" said the Marquis, recklessly throwing various
parts of himself right and left about the field. "You are making a
mistake; but it can't be explained just now. I tell you the train
has come into the station!"

"Yes," said Dr. Bull fiercely, "and the train shall go out of the
station. It shall go out without you. We know well enough for what
devil's work--"

The mysterious Marquis lifted his hands with a desperate gesture.
He was a strange scarecrow standing there in the sun with half his
old face peeled off, and half another face glaring and grinning
from underneath.

"Will you drive me mad?" he cried. "The train--"

"You shall not go by the train," said Syme firmly, and grasped his
sword.

The wild figure turned towards Syme, and seemed to be gathering
itself for a sublime effort before speaking.

"You great fat, blasted, blear-eyed, blundering, thundering,
brainless, Godforsaken, doddering, damned fool!" he said without
taking breath. "You great silly, pink-faced, towheaded turnip!
You--"

"You shall not go by this train," repeated Syme.

"And why the infernal blazes," roared the other, "should I want to
go by the train?"

"We know all," said the Professor sternly. "You are going to Paris
to throw a bomb!"

"Going to Jericho to throw a Jabberwock!" cried the other, tearing
his hair, which came off easily.

"Have you all got softening of the brain, that you don't realise
what I am? Did you really think I wanted to catch that train?
Twenty Paris trains might go by for me. Damn Paris trains!"

"Then what did you care about?" began the Professor.

"What did I care about? I didn't care about catching the train; I
cared about whether the train caught me, and now, by God! it has
caught me."

"I regret to inform you," said Syme with restraint, "that your
remarks convey no impression to my mind. Perhaps if you were to
remove the remains of your original forehead and some portion of
what was once your chin, your meaning would become clearer. Mental
lucidity fulfils itself in many ways. What do you mean by saying
that the train has caught you? It may be my literary fancy, but
somehow I feel that it ought to mean something."

"It means everything," said the other, "and the end of everything.
Sunday has us now in the hollow of his hand."

"Us!" repeated the Professor, as if stupefied. "What do you mean by
'us'?"

"The police, of course!" said the Marquis, and tore off his scalp
and half his face.

The head which emerged was the blonde, well brushed, smooth-haired
head which is common in the English constabulary, but the face was
terribly pale.

"I am Inspector Ratcliffe," he said, with a sort of haste that
verged on harshness. "My name is pretty well known to the police,
and I can see well enough that you belong to them. But if there is
any doubt about my position, I have a card" and he began to pull a
blue card from his pocket.

The Professor gave a tired gesture.

"Oh, don't show it us," he said wearily; "we've got enough of them
to equip a paper-chase."

The little man named Bull, had, like many men who seem to be of a
mere vivacious vulgarity, sudden movements of good taste. Here he
certainly saved the situation. In the midst of this staggering
transformation scene he stepped forward with all the gravity and
responsibility of a second, and addressed the two seconds of the
Marquis.

"Gentlemen," he said, "we all owe you a serious apology; but I
assure you that you have not been made the victims of such a low
joke as you imagine, or indeed of anything undignified in a man of
honour. You have not wasted your time; you have helped to save the
world. We are not buffoons, but very desperate men at war with a
vast conspiracy. A secret society of anarchists is hunting us like
hares; not such unfortunate madmen as may here or there throw a
bomb through starvation or German philosophy, but a rich and
powerful and fanatical church, a church of eastern pessimism, which
holds it holy to destroy mankind like vermin. How hard they hunt us
you can gather from the fact that we are driven to such disguises
as those for which I apologise, and to such pranks as this one by
which you suffer. "

The younger second of the Marquis, a short man with a black
moustache, bowed politely, and said--

"Of course, I accept the apology; but you will in your turn forgive
me if I decline to follow you further into your difficulties, and
permit myself to say good morning! The sight of an acquaintance and
distinguished fellow-townsman coming to pieces in the open air is
unusual, and, upon the whole, sufficient for one day. Colonel
Ducroix, I would in no way influence your actions, but if you feel
with me that our present society is a little abnormal, I am now
going to walk back to the town."

Colonel Ducroix moved mechanically, but then tugged abruptly at his
white moustache and broke out--

"No, by George! I won't. If these gentlemen are really in a mess
with a lot of low wreckers like that, I'll see them through it. I
have fought for France, and it is hard if I can't fight for
civilization."

Dr. Bull took off his hat and waved it, cheering as at a public
meeting.

"Don't make too much noise," said Inspector Ratcliffe, "Sunday may
hear you."

"Sunday!" cried Bull, and dropped his hat.

"Yes," retorted Ratcliffe, "he may be with them."

"With whom?" asked Syme.

"With the people out of that train," said the other.

"What you say seems utterly wild," began Syme. "Why, as a matter of
fact--But, my God," he cried out suddenly, like a man who sees an
explosion a long way off, "by God! if this is true the whole bally
lot of us on the Anarchist Council were against anarchy! Every born
man was a detective except the President and his personal
secretary. What can it mean?"

"Mean!" said the new policeman with incredible violence. "It means
that we are struck dead! Don't you know Sunday? Don't you know that
his jokes are always so big and simple that one has never thought
of them? Can you think of anything more like Sunday than this, that
he should put all his powerful enemies on the Supreme Council, and
then take care that it was not supreme? I tell you he has bought
every trust, he has captured every cable, he has control of every
railway line--especially of that railway line!" and he pointed a
shaking finger towards the small wayside station. "The whole
movement was controlled by him; half the world was ready to rise
for him. But there were just five people, perhaps, who would have
resisted him . . . and the old devil put them on the Supreme
Council, to waste their time in watching each other. Idiots that
we are, he planned the whole of our idiocies! Sunday knew that the
Professor would chase Syme through London, and that Syme would
fight me in France. And he was combining great masses of capital,
and seizing great lines of telegraphy, while we five idiots were
running after each other like a lot of confounded babies playing
blind man's buff."

"Well?" asked Syme with a sort of steadiness.

"Well," replied the other with sudden serenity, "he has found us
playing blind man's buff today in a field of great rustic beauty
and extreme solitude. He has probably captured the world; it only
remains to him to capture this field and all the fools in it. And
since you really want to know what was my objection to the arrival
of that train, I will tell you. My objection was that Sunday or his
Secretary has just this moment got out of it."

Syme uttered an involuntary cry, and they all turned their eyes
towards the far-off station. It was quite true that a considerable
bulk of people seemed to be moving in their direction. But they
were too distant to be distinguished in any way.

"It was a habit of the late Marquis de St. Eustache," said the new
policeman, producing a leather case, "always to carry a pair of
opera glasses. Either the President or the Secretary is coming
after us with that mob. They have caught us in a nice quiet place
where we are under no temptations to break our oaths by calling
the police. Dr. Bull, I have a suspicion that you will see better
through these than through your own highly decorative spectacles."

He handed the field-glasses to the Doctor, who immediately took
off his spectacles and put the apparatus to his eyes.

"It cannot be as bad as you say," said the Professor, somewhat
shaken. "There are a good number of them certainly, but they may
easily be ordinary tourists."

"Do ordinary tourists," asked Bull, with the fieldglasses to his
eyes, "wear black masks half-way down the face?"

Syme almost tore the glasses out of his hand, and looked through
them. Most men in the advancing mob really looked ordinary enough;
but it was quite true that two or three of the leaders in front
wore black half-masks almost down to their mouths. This disguise
is very complete, especially at such a distance, and Syme found
it impossible to conclude anything from the clean-shaven jaws and
chins of the men talking in the front. But presently as they
talked they all smiled and one of them smiled on one side.



CHAPTER XI

THE CRIMINALS CHASE THE POLICE

SYME put the field-glasses from his eyes with an almost ghastly
relief.

"The President is not with them, anyhow," he said, and wiped his
forehead.

"But surely they are right away on the horizon," said the
bewildered Colonel, blinking and but half recovered from Bull's
hasty though polite explanation. "Could you possibly know your
President among all those people?"

"Could I know a white elephant among all those people!" answered
Syme somewhat irritably. "As you very truly say, they are on the
horizon; but if he were walking with them . . . by God! I believe
this ground would shake."

After an instant's pause the new man called Ratcliffe said with
gloomy decision--

"Of course the President isn't with them. I wish to Gemini he were.
Much more likely the President is riding in triumph through Paris,
or sitting on the ruins of St. Paul's Cathedral."

"This is absurd!" said Syme. "Something may have happened in our
absence; but he cannot have carried the world with a rush like
that. It is quite true," he added, frowning dubiously at the
distant fields that lay towards the little station, "it is
certainly true that there seems to be a crowd coming this way;
but they are not all the army that you make out."

"Oh, they," said the new detective contemptuously; "no they are
not a very valuable force. But let me tell you frankly that they
are precisely calculated to our value--we are not much, my boy,
in Sunday's universe. He has got hold of all the cables and
telegraphs himself. But to kill the Supreme Council he regards as
a trivial matter, like a post card; it may be left to his private
secretary," and he spat on the grass.

Then he turned to the others and said somewhat austerely--

"There is a great deal to be said for death; but if anyone has
any preference for the other alternative, I strongly advise him
to walk after me."

With these words, he turned his broad back and strode with silent
energy towards the wood. The others gave one glance over their
shoulders, and saw that the dark cloud of men had detached itself
from the station and was moving with a mysterious discipline
across the plain. They saw already, even with the naked eye, black
blots on the foremost faces, which marked the masks they wore.
They turned and followed their leader, who had already struck the
wood, and disappeared among the twinkling trees.

The sun on the grass was dry and hot. So in plunging into the wood
they had a cool shock of shadow, as of divers who plunge into a
dim pool. The inside of the wood was full of shattered sunlight
and shaken shadows. They made a sort of shuddering veil, almost
recalling the dizziness of a cinematograph. Even the solid figures
walking with him Syme could hardly see for the patterns of sun and
shade that danced upon them. Now a man's head was lit as with a
light of Rembrandt, leaving all else obliterated; now again he had
strong and staring white hands with the face of a negro. The
ex-Marquis had pulled the old straw hat over his eyes, and the
black shade of the brim cut his face so squarely in two that it
seemed to be wearing one of the black half-masks of their pursuers.
The fancy tinted Syme's overwhelming sense of wonder. Was he
wearing a mask? Was anyone wearing a mask? Was anyone anything?
This wood of witchery, in which men's faces turned black and white
by turns, in which their figures first swelled into sunlight and
then faded into formless night, this mere chaos of chiaroscuro
(after the clear daylight outside), seemed to Syme a perfect symbol
of the world in which he had been moving for three days, this world
where men took off their beards and their spectacles and their
noses, and turned into other people. That tragic self-confidence
which he had felt when he believed that the Marquis was a devil
had strangely disappeared now that he knew that the Marquis was
a friend. He felt almost inclined to ask after all these
bewilderments what was a friend and what an enemy. Was there
anything that was apart from what it seemed? The Marquis had taken
off his nose and turned out to be a detective. Might he not just
as well take off his head and turn out to be a hobgoblin? Was not
everything, after all, like this bewildering woodland, this dance
of dark and light? Everything only a glimpse, the glimpse always
unforeseen, and always forgotten. For Gabriel Syme had found in
the heart of that sun-splashed wood what many modern painters had
found there. He had found the thing which the modern people call
Impressionism, which is another name for that final scepticism
which can find no floor to the universe.

As a man in an evil dream strains himself to scream and wake, Syme
strove with a sudden effort to fling off this last and worst of
his fancies. With two impatient strides he overtook the man in the
Marquis's straw hat, the man whom he had come to address as
Ratcliffe. In a voice exaggeratively loud and cheerful, he broke
the bottomless silence and made conversation.

"May I ask," he said, "where on earth we are all going to? "

So genuine had been the doubts of his soul, that he was quite glad
to hear his companion speak in an easy, human voice.

"We must get down through the town of Lancy to the sea," he said.
"I think that part of the country is least likely to be with
them."

"What can you mean by all this?" cried Syme. "They can't be
running the real world in that way. Surely not many working men
are anarchists, and surely if they were, mere mobs could not beat
modern armies and police."

"Mere mobs!" repeated his new friend with a snort of scorn. "So
you talk about mobs and the working classes as if they were the
question. You've got that eternal idiotic idea that if anarchy
came it would come from the poor. Why should it? The poor have
been rebels, but they have never been anarchists; they have more
interest than anyone else in there being some decent government.
The poor man really has a stake in the country. The rich man
hasn't; he can go away to New Guinea in a yacht. The poor have
sometimes objected to being governed badly; the rich have always
objected to being governed at all. Aristocrats were always
anarchists, as you can see from the barons' wars."

"As a lecture on English history for the little ones," said Syme,
"this is all very nice; but I have not yet grasped its application."

"Its application is," said his informant, "that most of old Sunday's
right-hand men are South African and American millionaires. That is
why he has got hold of all the communications; and that is why the
last four champions of the anti-anarchist police force are running
through a wood like rabbits."

"Millionaires I can understand," said Syme thoughtfully, "they are
nearly all mad. But getting hold of a few wicked old gentlemen with
hobbies is one thing; getting hold of great Christian nations is
another. I would bet the nose off my face (forgive the allusion)
that Sunday would stand perfectly helpless before the task of
converting any ordinary healthy person anywhere."

"Well," said the other, "it rather depends what sort of person you
mean."

"Well, for instance," said Syme, "he could never convert that
person," and he pointed straight in front of him.

They had come to an open space of sunlight, which seemed to express
to Syme the final return of his own good sense; and in the middle
of this forest clearing was a figure that might well stand for that
common sense in an almost awful actuality. Burnt by the sun and
stained with perspiration, and grave with the bottomless gravity of
small necessary toils, a heavy French peasant was cutting wood with
a hatchet. His cart stood a few yards off, already half full of
timber; and the horse that cropped the grass was, like his master,
valorous but not desperate; like his master, he was even
prosperous, but yet was almost sad. The man was a Norman, taller
than the average of the French and very angular; and his swarthy
figure stood dark against a square of sunlight, almost like some
allegoric figure of labour frescoed on a ground of gold.

"Mr. Syme is saying," called out Ratcliffe to the French Colonel,
"that this man, at least, will never be an anarchist."

"Mr. Syme is right enough there," answered Colonel Ducroix,
laughing, "if only for the reason that he has plenty of property
to defend. But I forgot that in your country you are not used to
peasants being wealthy."

"He looks poor," said Dr. Bull doubtfully.

"Quite so," said the Colonel; "that is why he is rich."

"I have an idea," called out Dr. Bull suddenly; "how much would he
take to give us a lift in his cart? Those dogs are all on foot, and
we could soon leave them behind."

"Oh, give him anything!" said Syme eagerly. "I have piles of money
on me."

"That will never do," said the Colonel; "he will never have any
respect for you unless you drive a bargain."

"Oh, if he haggles!" began Bull impatiently.

"Erie haggles because he is a free man," said the other. "You do
not understand; he would not see the meaning of generosity. He is
not being tipped."

And even while they seemed to hear the heavy feet of their strange
pursuers behind them, they had to stand and stamp while the French
Colonel talked to the French wood-cutter with all the leisurely
badinage and bickering of market-day. At the end of the four
minutes, however, they saw that the Colonel was right, for the
wood-cutter entered into their plans, not with the vague servility
of a tout too-well paid, but with the seriousness of a solicitor
who had been paid the proper fee. He told them that the best thing
they could do was to make their way down to the little inn on the
hills above Lancy, where the innkeeper, an old soldier who had
become devot in his latter years, would be certain to sympathise
with them, and even to take risks in their support. The whole
company, therefore, piled themselves on top of the stacks of wood,
and went rocking in the rude cart down the other and steeper side
of the woodland. Heavy and ramshackle as was the vehicle, it was
driven quickly enough, and they soon had the exhilarating
impression of distancing altogether those, whoever they were, who
were hunting them. For, after all, the riddle as to where the
anarchists had got all these followers was still unsolved. One
man's presence had sufficed for them; they had fled at the first
sight of the deformed smile of the Secretary. Syme every now and
then looked back over his shoulder at the army on their track.

As the wood grew first thinner and then smaller with distance, he
could see the sunlit slopes beyond it and above it; and across
these was still moving the square black mob like one monstrous
beetle. In the very strong sunlight and with his own very strong
eyes, which were almost telescopic, Syme could see this mass of
men quite plainly. He could see them as separate human figures;
but he was increasingly surprised by the way in which they moved
as one man. They seemed to be dressed in dark clothes and plain
hats, like any common crowd out of the streets; but they did not
spread and sprawl and trail by various lines to the attack, as
would be natural in an ordinary mob. They moved with a sort of
dreadful and wicked woodenness, like a staring army of automatons.

Syme pointed this out to Ratcliffe.

"Yes," replied the policeman, "that's discipline. That's Sunday. He
is perhaps five hundred miles off, but the fear of him is on all of
them, like the finger of God. Yes, they are walking regularly; and
you bet your boots that they are talking regularly, yes, and
thinking regularly. But the one important thing for us is that they
are disappearing regularly."

Syme nodded. It was true that the black patch of the pursuing men
was growing smaller and smaller as the peasant belaboured his
horse.

The level of the sunlit landscape, though flat as a whole, fell
away on the farther side of the wood in billows of heavy slope
towards the sea, in a way not unlike the lower slopes of the
Sussex downs. The only difference was that in Sussex the road
would have been broken and angular like a little brook, but
here the white French road fell sheer in front of them like a
waterfall. Down this direct descent the cart clattered at a
considerable angle, and in a few minutes, the road growing yet
steeper, they saw below them the little harbour of Lancy and a
great blue arc of the sea. The travelling cloud of their enemies
had wholly disappeared from the horizon.

The horse and cart took a sharp turn round a clump of elms, and
the horse's nose nearly struck the face of an old gentleman who
was sitting on the benches outside the little cafe of "Le Soleil
d'Or." The peasant grunted an apology, and got down from his
seat. The others also descended one by one, and spoke to the old
gentleman with fragmentary phrases of courtesy, for it was quite
evident from his expansive manner that he was the owner of the
little tavern.

He was a white-haired, apple-faced old boy, with sleepy eyes and
a grey moustache; stout, sedentary, and very innocent, of a type
that may often be found in France, but is still commoner in
Catholic Germany. Everything about him, his pipe, his pot of beer,
his flowers, and his beehive, suggested an ancestral peace; only
when his visitors looked up as they entered the inn-parlour, they
saw the sword upon the wall.

The Colonel, who greeted the innkeeper as an old friend, passed
rapidly into the inn-parlour, and sat down ordering some ritual
refreshment. The military decision of his action interested Syme,
who sat next to him, and he took the opportunity when the old
innkeeper had gone out of satisfying his curiosity.

"May I ask you, Colonel," he said in a low voice, "why we have
come here?"

Colonel Ducroix smiled behind his bristly white moustache.

"For two reasons, sir," he said; "and I will give first, not the
most important, but the most utilitarian. We came here because
this is the only place within twenty miles in which we can get
horses."

"Horses!" repeated Syme, looking up quickly.

"Yes," replied the other; "if you people are really to distance
your enemies it is horses or nothing for you, unless of course
you have bicycles and motor-cars in your pocket."

"And where do you advise us to make for?" asked Syme doubtfully.

"Beyond question," replied the Colonel, "you had better make all
haste to the police station beyond the town. My friend, whom I
seconded under somewhat deceptive circumstances, seems to me to
exaggerate very much the possibilities of a general rising; but
even he would hardly maintain, I suppose, that you were not safe
with the gendarmes."

Syme nodded gravely; then he said abruptly--

"And your other reason for coming here?"

"My other reason for coming here," said Ducroix soberly, "is that
it is just as well to see a good man or two when one is possibly
near to death."

Syme looked up at the wall, and saw a crudely-painted and pathetic
religious picture. Then he said--

"You are right," and then almost immediately afterwards, "Has
anyone seen about the horses?"

"Yes," answered Ducroix, "you may be quite certain that I gave
orders the moment I came in. Those enemies of yours gave no
impression of hurry, but they were really moving wonderfully fast,
like a well-trained army. I had no idea that the anarchists had so
much discipline. You have not a moment to waste."

Almost as he spoke, the old innkeeper with the blue eyes and white
hair came ambling into the room, and announced that six horses
were saddled outside.

By Ducroix's advice the five others equipped themselves with some
portable form of food and wine, and keeping their duelling swords
as the only weapons available, they clattered away down the steep,
white road. The two servants, who had carried the Marquis's
luggage when he was a marquis, were left behind to drink at the
cafe by common consent, and not at all against their own
inclination.

By this time the afternoon sun was slanting westward, and by its
rays Syme could see the sturdy figure of the old innkeeper growing
smaller and smaller, but still standing and looking after them
quite silently, the sunshine in his silver hair. Syme had a fixed,
superstitious fancy, left in his mind by the chance phrase of the
Colonel, that this was indeed, perhaps, the last honest stranger
whom he should ever see upon the earth.

He was still looking at this dwindling figure, which stood as a
mere grey blot touched with a white flame against the great green
wall of the steep down behind him. And as he stared over the top
of the down behind the innkeeper, there appeared an army of
black-clad and marching men. They seemed to hang above the good
man and his house like a black cloud of locusts. The horses had
been saddled none too soon.



CHAPTER XII

THE EARTH IN ANARCHY

URGING the horses to a gallop, without respect to the rather
rugged descent of the road, the horsemen soon regained their
advantage over the men on the march, and at last the bulk of the
first buildings of Lancy cut off the sight of their pursuers.
Nevertheless, the ride had been a long one, and by the time they
reached the real town the west was warming with the colour and
quality of sunset. The Colonel suggested that, before making
finally for the police station, they should make the effort, in
passing, to attach to themselves one more individual who might be
useful.

"Four out of the five rich men in this town," he said, "are common
swindlers. I suppose the proportion is pretty equal all over the
world. The fifth is a friend of mine, and a very fine fellow; and
what is even more important from our point of view, he owns a
motor-car."

"I am afraid," said the Professor in his mirthful way, looking
back along the white road on which the black, crawling patch might
appear at any moment, "I am afraid we have hardly time for
afternoon calls."

"Doctor Renard's house is only three minutes off," said the
Colonel.

"Our danger," said Dr. Bull, "is not two minutes off."

"Yes," said Syme, "if we ride on fast we must leave them behind,
for they are on foot."

"He has a motor-car," said the Colonel.

"But we may not get it," said Bull.

"Yes, he is quite on your side."

"But he might be out."

"Hold your tongue," said Syme suddenly. "What is that noise?"

For a second they all sat as still as equestrian statues, and
for a second--for two or three or four seconds--heaven and earth
seemed equally still. Then all their ears, in an agony of
attention, heard along the road that indescribable thrill and
throb that means only one thing--horses!

The Colonel's face had an instantaneous change, as if lightning
had struck it, and yet left it scatheless.

"They have done us," he said, with brief military irony. "Prepare
to receive cavalry!"

"Where can they have got the horses?" asked Syme, as he
mechanically urged his steed to a canter.

The Colonel was silent for a little, then he said in a strained
voice--

"I was speaking with strict accuracy when I said that the 'Soleil
d'Or' was the only place where one can get horses within twenty
miles."

"No!" said Syme violently, "I don't believe he'd do it. Not with
all that white hair."

"He may have been forced," said the Colonel gently. "They must be
at least a hundred strong, for which reason we are all going to
see my friend Renard, who has a motor-car."

With these words he swung his horse suddenly round a street
corner, and went down the street with such thundering speed, that
the others, though already well at the gallop, had difficulty in
following the flying tail of his horse.

Dr. Renard inhabited a high and comfortable house at the top of a
steep street, so that when the riders alighted at his door they
could once more see the solid green ridge of the hill, with the
white road across it, standing up above all the roofs of the town.
They breathed again to see that the road as yet was clear, and they
rang the bell.

Dr. Renard was a beaming, brown-bearded man, a good example of that
silent but very busy professional class which France has preserved
even more perfectly than England. When the matter was explained to
him he pooh-poohed the panic of the ex-Marquis altogether; he said,
with the solid French scepticism, that there was no conceivable
probability of a general anarchist rising. "Anarchy," he said,
shrugging his shoulders, "it is childishness!"

"Et ca," cried out the Colonel suddenly, pointing over the other's
shoulder, "and that is childishness, isn't it?"

They all looked round, and saw a curve of black cavalry come
sweeping over the top of the hill with all the energy of Attila.
Swiftly as they rode, however, the whole rank still kept well
together, and they could see the black vizards of the first line
as level as a line of uniforms. But although the main black
square was the same, though travelling faster, there was now one
sensational difference which they could see clearly upon the slope
of the hill, as if upon a slanted map. The bulk of the riders were
in one block; but one rider flew far ahead of the column, and with
frantic movements of hand and heel urged his horse faster and
faster, so that one might have fancied that he was not the pursuer
but the pursued. But even at that great distance they could see
something so fanatical, so unquestionable in his figure, that they
knew it was the Secretary himself. "I am sorry to cut short a
cultured discussion," said the Colonel, "but can you lend me your
motor-car now, in two minutes?"

"I have a suspicion that you are all mad," said Dr. Renard, smiling
sociably; "but God forbid that madness should in any way interrupt
friendship. Let us go round to the garage."

Dr. Renard was a mild man with monstrous wealth; his rooms were
like the Musee de Cluny, and he had three motor-cars. These,
however, he seemed to use very sparingly, having the simple tastes
of the French middle class, and when his impatient friends came to
examine them, it took them some time to assure themselves that one
of them even could be made to work. This with some difficulty they
brought round into the street before the Doctor's house. When they
came out of the dim garage they were startled to find that
twilight had already fallen with the abruptness of night in the
tropics. Either they had been longer in the place than they
imagined, or some unusual canopy of cloud had gathered over the
town. They looked down the steep streets, and seemed to see a
slight mist coming up from the sea.

"It is now or never," said Dr. Bull. "I hear horses."

"No," corrected the Professor, "a horse."

And as they listened, it was evident that the noise, rapidly
coming nearer on the rattling stones, was not the noise of the
whole cavalcade but that of the one horseman, who had left it
far behind--the insane Secretary.

Syme's family, like most of those who end in the simple life, had
once owned a motor, and he knew all about them. He had leapt at
once into the chauffeur's seat, and with flushed face was wrenching
and tugging at the disused machinery. He bent his strength upon one
handle, and then said quite quietly--

"I am afraid it's no go."

As he spoke, there swept round the corner a man rigid on his
rushing horse, with the rush and rigidity of an arrow. He had a
smile that thrust out his chin as if it were dislocated. He swept
alongside of the stationary car, into which its company had
crowded, and laid his hand on the front. It was the Secretary,
and his mouth went quite straight in the solemnity of triumph.

Syme was leaning hard upon the steering wheel, and there was no
sound but the rumble of the other pursuers riding into the town.
Then there came quite suddenly a scream of scraping iron, and the
car leapt forward. It plucked the Secretary clean out of his
saddle, as a knife is whipped out of its sheath, trailed him
kicking terribly for twenty yards, and left him flung flat upon
the road far in front of his frightened horse. As the car took
the corner of the street with a splendid curve, they could just
see the other anarchists filling the street and raising their
fallen leader.

"I can't understand why it has grown so dark," said the Professor
at last in a low voice.

"Going to be a storm, I think," said Dr. Bull. "I say, it's a pity
we haven't got a light on this car, if only to see by."

"We have," said the Colonel, and from the floor of the car he
fished up a heavy, old-fashioned, carved iron lantern with a light
inside it. It was obviously an antique, and it would seem as if
its original use had been in some way semi-religious, for there
was a rude moulding of a cross upon one of its sides.

"Where on earth did you get that?" asked the Professor.

"I got it where I got the car," answered the Colonel, chuckling,
"from my best friend. While our friend here was fighting with the
steering wheel, I ran up the front steps of the house and spoke to
Renard, who was standing in his own porch, you will remember. 'I
suppose,' I said, 'there's no time to get a lamp.' He looked up,
blinking amiably at the beautiful arched ceiling of his own front
hall. From this was suspended, by chains of exquisite ironwork,
this lantern, one of the hundred treasures of his treasure house.
By sheer force he tore the lamp out of his own ceiling, shattering
the painted panels, and bringing down two blue vases with his
violence. Then he handed me the iron lantern, and I put it in the
car. Was I not right when I said that Dr. Renard was worth
knowing?"

"You were," said Syme seriously, and hung the heavy lantern over
the front. There was a certain allegory of their whole position
in the contrast between the modern automobile and its strange
ecclesiastical lamp. Hitherto they had passed through the quietest
part of the town, meeting at most one or two pedestrians, who could
give them no hint of the peace or the hostility of the place. Now,
however, the windows in the houses began one by one to be lit up,
giving a greater sense of habitation and humanity. Dr. Bull turned
to the new detective who had led their flight, and permitted
himself one of his natural and friendly smiles.

"These lights make one feel more cheerful."

Inspector Ratcliffe drew his brows together.

"There is only one set of lights that make me more cheerful," he
said, "and they are those lights of the police station which I can
see beyond the town. Please God we may be there in ten minutes."

Then all Bull's boiling good sense and optimism broke suddenly out
of him.

"Oh, this is all raving nonsense!" he cried. "If you really think
that ordinary people in ordinary houses are anarchists, you must be
madder than an anarchist yourself. If we turned and fought these
fellows, the whole town would fight for us."

"No," said the other with an immovable simplicity, "the whole town
would fight for them. We shall see.'

While they were speaking the Professor had leant forward with
sudden excitement.

"What is that noise?" he said.

"Oh, the horses behind us, I suppose," said the Colonel. "I thought
we had got clear of them."

"The horses behind us! No," said the Professor, "it is not horses,
and it is not behind us."

Almost as he spoke, across the end of the street before them two
shining and rattling shapes shot past. They were gone almost in a
flash, but everyone could see that they were motor-cars, and the
Professor stood up with a pale face and swore that they were the
other two motor-cars from Dr. Renard's garage.

"I tell you they were his," he repeated, with wild eyes, "and they
were full of men in masks!"

"Absurd!" said the Colonel angrily. "Dr. Renard would never give
them his cars."

"He may have been forced," said Ratcliffe quietly. "The whole town
is on their side."

"You still believe that," asked the Colonel incredulously.

"You will all believe it soon," said the other with a hopeless
calm.

There was a puzzled pause for some little time, and then the
Colonel began again abruptly--

"No, I can't believe it. The thing is nonsense. The plain people of
a peaceable French town--"

He was cut short by a bang and a blaze of light, which seemed close
to his eyes. As the car sped on it left a floating patch of white
smoke behind it, and Syme had heard a shot shriek past his ear.

"My God!" said the Colonel, "someone has shot at us."

"It need not interrupt conversation," said the gloomy Ratcliffe.
"Pray resume your remarks, Colonel. You were talking, I think,
about the plain people of a peaceable French town."

The staring Colonel was long past minding satire. He rolled his
eyes all round the street.

"It is extraordinary," he said, "most extraordinary."

"A fastidious person," said Syme, "might even call it unpleasant.
However, I suppose those lights out in the field beyond this street
are the Gendarmerie. We shall soon get there."

"No," said Inspector Ratcliffe, "we shall never get there."

He had been standing up and looking keenly ahead of him. Now he sat
down and smoothed his sleek hair with a weary gesture.

"What do you mean?" asked Bull sharply.

"I mean that we shall never get there," said the pessimist
placidly. "They have two rows of armed men across the road already;
I can see them from here. The town is in arms, as I said it was.

I can only wallow in the exquisite comfort of my own exactitude."

And Ratcliffe sat down comfortably in the car and lit a cigarette,
but the others rose excitedly and stared down the road. Syme had
slowed down the car as their plans became doubtful, and he brought
it finally to a standstill just at the corner of a side street
that ran down very steeply to the sea.

The town was mostly in shadow, but the sun had not sunk; wherever
its level light could break through, it painted everything a
burning gold. Up this side street the last sunset light shone as
sharp and narrow as the shaft of artificial light at the theatre.
It struck the car of the five friends, and lit it like a burning
chariot. But the rest of the street, especially the two ends of
it, was in the deepest twilight, and for some seconds they could
see nothing. Then Syme, whose eyes were the keenest, broke into a
little bitter whistle, and said

"It is quite true. There is a crowd or an army or some such thing
across the end of that street."

"Well, if there is," said Bull impatiently, "it must be something
else--a sham fight or the mayor's birthday or something. I cannot
and will not believe that plain, jolly people in a place like this
walk about with dynamite in their pockets. Get on a bit, Syme, and
let us look at them."

The car crawled about a hundred yards farther, and then they were
all startled by Dr. Bull breaking into a high crow of laughter.

"Why, you silly mugs!" he cried, "what did I tell you. That
crowd's as law-abiding as a cow, and if it weren't, it's on our
side."

"How do you know?" asked the professor, staring.

"You blind bat," cried Bull, "don't you see who is leading them?"

They peered again, and then the Colonel, with a catch in his
voice, cried out--

"Why, it's Renard!"

There was, indeed, a rank of dim figures running across the road,
and they could not be clearly seen; but far enough in front to
catch the accident of the evening light was stalking up and down
the unmistakable Dr. Renard, in a white hat, stroking his long
brown beard, and holding a revolver in his left hand.

"What a fool I've been!" exclaimed the Colonel. "Of course, the
dear old boy has turned out to help us."

Dr. Bull was bubbling over with laughter, swinging the sword in
his hand as carelessly as a cane. He jumped out of the car and
ran across the intervening space, calling out--

"Dr. Renard! Dr. Renard!"

An instant after Syme thought his own eyes had gone mad in his
head. For the philanthropic Dr. Renard had deliberately raised his
revolver and fired twice at Bull, so that the shots rang down the
road.

Almost at the same second as the puff of white cloud went up from
this atrocious explosion a long puff of white cloud went up also
from the cigarette of the cynical Ratcliffe. Like all the rest he
turned a little pale, but he smiled. Dr. Bull, at whom the bullets
had been fired, just missing his scalp, stood quite still in the
middle of the road without a sign of fear, and then turned very
slowly and crawled back to the car, and climbed in with two holes
through his hat.

"Well," said the cigarette smoker slowly, "what do you think now?"

"I think," said Dr. Bull with precision, "that I am lying in bed
at No. 217 Peabody Buildings, and that I shall soon wake up with a
jump; or, if that's not it, I think that I am sitting in a small
cushioned cell in Hanwell, and that the doctor can't make much of
my case. But if you want to know what I don't think, I'll tell you.
I don't think what you think. I don't think, and I never shall
think, that the mass of ordinary men are a pack of dirty modern
thinkers. No, sir, I'm a democrat, and I still don't believe that
Sunday could convert one average navvy or counter-jumper. No, I may
be mad, but humanity isn't."

Syme turned his bright blue eyes on Bull with an earnestness which
he did not commonly make clear.

"You are a very fine fellow," he said. "You can believe in a sanity
which is not merely your sanity. And you're right enough about
humanity, about peasants and people like that jolly old innkeeper.
But you're not right about Renard. I suspected him from the first.
He's rationalistic, and, what's worse, he's rich. When duty and
religion are really destroyed, it will be by the rich."

"They are really destroyed now," said the man with a cigarette, and
rose with his hands in his pockets. "The devils are coming on!"

The men in the motor-car looked anxiously in the direction of his
dreamy gaze, and they saw that the whole regiment at the end of the
road was advancing upon them, Dr. Renard marching furiously in
front, his beard flying in the breeze.

The Colonel sprang out of the car with an intolerant exclamation.

"Gentlemen," he cried, "the thing is incredible. It must be a
practical joke. If you knew Renard as I do--it's like calling Queen
Victoria a dynamiter. If you had got the man's character into your
head--"

"Dr. Bull," said Syme sardonically, "has at least got it into his
hat."

"I tell you it can't be!" cried the Colonel, stamping.

"Renard shall explain it. He shall explain it to me," and he strode
forward.

"Don't be in such a hurry," drawled the smoker. "He will very soon
explain it to all of us."

But the impatient Colonel was already out of earshot, advancing
towards the advancing enemy. The excited Dr. Renard lifted his
pistol again, but perceiving his opponent, hesitated, and the
Colonel came face to face with him with frantic gestures of
remonstrance.

"It is no good," said Syme. "He will never get anything out of that
old heathen. I vote we drive bang through the thick of them, bang
as the bullets went through Bull's hat. We may all be killed, but
we must kill a tidy number of them."

"I won't 'ave it," said Dr. Bull, growing more vulgar in the
sincerity of his virtue. "The poor chaps may be making a mistake.
Give the Colonel a chance."

"Shall we go back, then?" asked the Professor.

"No," said Ratcliffe in a cold voice, "the street behind us is held
too. In fact, I seem to see there another friend of yours, Syme."

Syme spun round smartly, and stared backwards at the track which
they had travelled. He saw an irregular body of horsemen gathering
and galloping towards them in the gloom. He saw above the foremost
saddle the silver gleam of a sword, and then as it grew nearer the
silver gleam of an old man's hair. The next moment, with shattering
violence, he had swung the motor round and sent it dashing down the
steep side street to the sea, like a man that desired only to die.

"What the devil is up?" cried the Professor, seizing his arm.

"The morning star has fallen!" said Syme, as his own car went down
the darkness like a falling star.

The others did not understand his words, but when they looked back
at the street above they saw the hostile cavalry coming round the
corner and down the slopes after them; and foremost of all rode the
good innkeeper, flushed with the fiery innocence of the evening
light.

"The world is insane!" said the Professor, and buried his face in
his hands.

"No," said Dr. Bull in adamantine humility, "it is I."

"What are we going to do?" asked the Professor.

"At this moment," said Syme, with a scientific detachment, "I think
we are going to smash into a lamppost."

The next instant the automobile had come with a catastrophic jar
against an iron object. The instant after that four men had crawled
out from under a chaos of metal, and a tall lean lamp-post that had
stood up straight on the edge of the marine parade stood out, bent
and twisted, like the branch of a broken tree.

"Well, we smashed something," said the Professor, with a faint
smile. "That's some comfort."

"You're becoming an anarchist," said Syme, dusting his clothes
with his instinct of daintiness.

"Everyone is," said Ratcliffe.

As they spoke, the white-haired horseman and his followers came
thundering from above, and almost at the same moment a dark string
of men ran shouting along the sea-front. Syme snatched a sword,
and took it in his teeth; he stuck two others under his arm-pits,
took a fourth in his left hand and the lantern in his right, and
leapt off the high parade on to the beach below.

The others leapt after him, with a common acceptance of such
decisive action, leaving the debris and the gathering mob above
them.

"We have one more chance," said Syme, taking the steel out of his
mouth. "Whatever all this pandemonium means, I suppose the police
station will help us. We can't get there, for they hold the way.
But there's a pier or breakwater runs out into the sea just here,
which we could defend longer than anything else, like Horatius and
his bridge. We must defend it till the Gendarmerie turn out. Keep
after me."

They followed him as he went crunching down the beach, and in a
second or two their boots broke not on the sea gravel, but on
broad, flat stones. They marched down a long, low jetty, running
out in one arm into the dim, boiling sea, and when they came to
the end of it they felt that they had come to the end of their
story. They turned and faced the town.

That town was transfigured with uproar. All along the high parade
from which they had just descended was a dark and roaring stream
of humanity, with tossing arms and fiery faces, groping and
glaring towards them. The long dark line was dotted with torches
and lanterns; but even where no flame lit up a furious face, they
could see in the farthest figure, in the most shadowy gesture, an
organised hate. It was clear that they were the accursed of all
men, and they knew not why.

Two or three men, looking little and black like monkeys, leapt
over the edge as they had done and dropped on to the beach. These
came ploughing down the deep sand, shouting horribly, and strove
to wade into the sea at random. The example was followed, and the
whole black mass of men began to run and drip over the edge like
black treacle.

Foremost among the men on the beach Syme saw the peasant who had
driven their cart. He splashed into the surf on a huge
cart-horse, and shook his axe at them.

"The peasant!" cried Syme. "They have not risen since the Middle
Ages."

"Even if the police do come now," said the Professor mournfully,
"they can do nothing with this mob."

"Nonsence!" said Bull desperately; "there must be some people
left in the town who are human."

"No," said the hopeless Inspector, "the human being will soon be
extinct. We are the last of mankind."

"It may be," said the Professor absently. Then he added in his
dreamy voice, "What is all that at the end of the 'Dunciad'?

'Nor public flame; nor private, dares to shine;
Nor human light is left, nor glimpse divine!
Lo! thy dread Empire, Chaos, is restored;
Light dies before thine uncreating word:
Thy hand, great Anarch, lets the curtain fall;
And universal darkness buries all."'

"Stop!" cried Bull suddenly, "the gendarmes are out."

The low lights of the police station were indeed blotted and
broken with hurrying figures, and they heard through the darkness
the clash and jingle of a disciplined cavalry.

"They are charging the mob!" cried Bull in ecstacy or alarm.

"No," said Syme, "they are formed along the parade."

"They have unslung their carbines," cried Bull dancing with
excitement.

"Yes," said Ratcliffe, "and they are going to fire on us."

As he spoke there came a long crackle of musketry, and bullets
seemed to hop like hailstones on the stones in front of them.

"The gendarmes have joined them!" cried the Professor, and struck
his forehead.

"I am in the padded cell," said Bull solidly.

There was a long silence, and then Ratcliffe said, looking out
over the swollen sea, all a sort of grey purple--

"What does it matter who is mad or who is sane? We shall all be
dead soon."

Syme turned to him and said--

"You are quite hopeless, then?"

Mr. Ratcliffe kept a stony silence; then at last he said quietly--

"No; oddly enough I am not quite hopeless. There is one insane
little hope that I cannot get out of my mind. The power of this
whole planet is against us, yet I cannot help wondering whether
this one silly little hope is hopeless yet."

"In what or whom is your hope?" asked Syme with curiosity.

"In a man I never saw," said the other, looking at the leaden sea.

"I know what you mean," said Syme in a low voice, "the man in the
dark room. But Sunday must have killed him by now."

"Perhaps," said the other steadily; "but if so, he was the only
man whom Sunday found it hard to kill."

"I heard what you said," said the Professor, with his back turned.
"I also am holding hard on to the thing I never saw."

All of a sudden Syme, who was standing as if blind with
introspective thought, swung round and cried out, like a man
waking from sleep--

"Where is the Colonel? I thought he was with us!"

"The Colonel! Yes," cried Bull, "where on earth is the Colonel?"

"He went to speak to Renard," said the Professor.

"We cannot leave him among all those beasts," cried Syme. "Let us
die like gentlemen if--"

"Do not pity the Colonel," said Ratcliffe, with a pale sneer. "He
is extremely comfortable. He is--"

"No! no! no!" cried Syme in a kind of frenzy, "not the Colonel too!
I will never believe it!"

"Will you believe your eyes?" asked the other, and pointed to the
beach.

Many of their pursuers had waded into the water shaking their
fists, but the sea was rough, and they could not reach the pier.
Two or three figures, however, stood on the beginning of the stone
footway, and seemed to be cautiously advancing down it. The glare
of a chance lantern lit up the faces of the two foremost. One face
wore a black half-mask, and under it the mouth was twisting about
in such a madness of nerves that the black tuft of beard wriggled
round and round like a restless, living thing. The other was the
red face and white moustache of Colonel Ducroix. They were in
earnest consultation.

"Yes, he is gone too," said the Professor, and sat down on a
stone. "Everything's gone. I'm gone! I can't trust my own bodily
machinery. I feel as if my own hand might fly up and strike me."

"When my hand flies up," said Syme, "it will strike somebody
else," and he strode along the pier towards the Colonel, the
sword in one hand and the lantern in the other.

As if to destroy the last hope or doubt, the Colonel, who saw him
coming, pointed his revolver at him and fired. The shot missed
Syme, but struck his sword, breaking it short at the hilt. Syme
rushed on, and swung the iron lantern above his head.

"Judas before Herod!" he said, and struck the Colonel down upon
the stones. Then he turned to the Secretary, whose frightful mouth
was almost foaming now, and held the lamp high with so rigid and
arresting a gesture, that the man was, as it were, frozen for a
moment, and forced to hear.

"Do you see this lantern?" cried Syme in a terrible voice. "Do you
see the cross carved on it, and the flame inside? You did not make
it. You did not light it, Better men than you, men who could
believe and obey, twisted the entrails of iron and preserved the
legend of fire. There is not a street you walk on, there is not a
thread you wear, that was not made as this lantern was, by denying
your philosophy of dirt and rats. You can make nothing. You can
only destroy. You will destroy mankind; you will destroy the world.
Let that suffice you. Yet this one old Christian lantern you shall
not destroy. It shall go where your empire of apes will never have
the wit to find it."

He struck the Secretary once with the lantern so that he staggered;
and then, whirling it twice round his head, sent it flying far out
to sea, where it flared like a roaring rocket and fell.

"Swords!" shouted Syme, turning his flaming face ; to the three
behind him. "Let us charge these dogs, for our time has come to
die."

His three companions came after him sword in hand. Syme's sword
was broken, but he rent a bludgeon from the fist of a fisherman,
flinging him down. In a moment they would have flung themselves
upon the face of the mob and perished, when an interruption came.
The Secretary, ever since Syme's speech, had stood with his hand
to his stricken head as if dazed; now he suddenly pulled off his
black mask.

The pale face thus peeled in the lamplight revealed not so much
rage as astonishment. He put up his hand with an anxious authority.

"There is some mistake," he said. "Mr. Syme, I hardly think you
understand your position. I arrest you in the name of the law."

"Of the law?" said Syme, and dropped his stick.

"Certainly!" said the Secretary. "I am a detective from Scotland
Yard," and he took a small blue card from his pocket.

"And what do you suppose we are?" asked the Professor, and threw
up his arms.

"You," said the Secretary stiffly, "are, as I know for a fact,
members of the Supreme Anarchist Council. Disguised as one of
you, I--"

Dr. Bull tossed his sword into the sea.

"There never was any Supreme Anarchist Council," he said. "We were
all a lot of silly policemen looking at each other. And all these
nice people who have been peppering us with shot thought we were
the dynamiters. I knew I couldn't be wrong about the mob," he said,
beaming over the enormous multitude, which stretched away to the
distance on both sides. "Vulgar people are never mad. I'm vulgar
myself, and I know. I am now going on shore to stand a drink to
everybody here."



CHAPTER XIII

THE PURSUIT OF THE PRESIDENT

NEXT morning five bewildered but hilarious people took the boat for
Dover. The poor old Colonel might have had some cause to complain,
having been first forced to fight for two factions that didn't
exist, and then knocked down with an iron lantern. But he was a
magnanimous old gentleman, and being much relieved that neither
party had anything to do with dynamite, he saw them off on the pier
with great geniality.

The five reconciled detectives had a hundred details to explain to
each other. The Secretary had to tell Syme how they had come to
wear masks originally in order to approach the supposed enemy as
fellow-conspirators;

Syme had to explain how they had fled with such swiftness through
a civilised country. But above all these matters of detail which
could be explained, rose the central mountain of the matter that
they could not explain. What did it all mean? If they were all
harmless officers, what was Sunday? If he had not seized the world,
what on earth had he been up to? Inspector Ratcliffe was still
gloomy about this.

"I can't make head or tail of old Sunday's little game any more
than you can," he said. "But whatever else Sunday is, he isn't
a blameless citizen. Damn it! do you remember his face?"

"I grant you," answered Syme, "that I have never been able to
forget it."

"Well," said the Secretary, "I suppose we can find out soon, for
tomorrow we have our next general meeting. You will excuse me,"
he said, with a rather ghastly smile, "for being well acquainted
with my secretarial duties."

"I suppose you are right," said the Professor reflectively. "I
suppose we might find it out from him; but I confess that I should
feel a bit afraid of asking Sunday who he really is."

"Why," asked the Secretary, "for fear of bombs?"

"No," said the Professor, "for fear he might tell me."

"Let us have some drinks," said Dr. Bull, after a silence.

Throughout their whole journey by boat and train they were highly
convivial, but they instinctively kept together. Dr. Bull, who had
always been the optimist of the party, endeavoured to persuade the
other four that the whole company could take the same hansom cab
from Victoria; but this was over-ruled, and they went in a
four-wheeler, with Dr. Bull on the box, singing. They finished
their journey at an hotel in Piccadilly Circus, so as to be close
to the early breakfast next morning in Leicester Square. Yet even
then the adventures of the day were not entirely over. Dr. Bull,
discontented with the general proposal to go to bed, had strolled
out of the hotel at about eleven to see and taste some of the
beauties of London. Twenty minutes afterwards, however, he came
back and made quite a clamour in the hall. Syme, who tried at
first to soothe him, was forced at last to listen to his
communication with quite new attention.

"I tell you I've seen him!" said Dr. Bull, with thick emphasis.

"Whom?" asked Syme quickly. "Not the President?"

"Not so bad as that," said Dr. Bull, with unnecessary laughter,
"not so bad as that. I've got him here."

"Got whom here?" asked Syme impatiently.

"Hairy man," said the other lucidly, "man that used to be hairy
man--Gogol. Here he is," and he pulled forward by a reluctant
elbow the identical young man who five days before had marched
out of the Council with thin red hair and a pale face, the first
of all the sham anarchists who had been exposed.

"Why do you worry with me?" he cried. "You have expelled me as a
spy."

"We are all spies!" whispered Syme.

"We're all spies!" shouted Dr. Bull. "Come and have a drink."

Next morning the battalion of the reunited six marched stolidly
towards the hotel in Leicester Square.

"This is more cheerful," said Dr. Bull; "we are six men going to
ask one man what he means."

"I think it is a bit queerer than that," said Syme. "I think it
is six men going to ask one man what they mean."

They turned in silence into the Square, and though the hotel was
in the opposite corner, they saw at once the little balcony and a
figure that looked too big for it. He was sitting alone with bent
head, poring over a newspaper. But all his councillors, who had
come to vote him down, crossed that Square as if they were watched
out of heaven by a hundred eyes.

They had disputed much upon their policy, about whether they
should leave the unmasked Gogol without and begin diplomatically,
or whether they should bring him in and blow up the gunpowder at
once. The influence of Syme and Bull prevailed for the latter
course, though the Secretary to the last asked them why they
attacked Sunday so rashly.

"My reason is quite simple," said Syme. "I attack him rashly
because I am afraid of him."

They followed Syme up the dark stair in silence, and they all came
out simultaneously into the broad sunlight of the morning and the
broad sunlight of Sunday's smile.

"Delightful!" he said. "So pleased to see you all. What an
exquisite day it is. Is the Czar dead?"

The Secretary, who happened to be foremost, drew himself together
for a dignified outburst.

"No, sir," he said sternly "there has been no massacre. I bring you
news of no such disgusting spectacles."

"Disgusting spectacles?" repeated the President, with a bright,
inquiring smile. "You mean Dr. Bull's spectacles?"

The Secretary choked for a moment, and the President went on with
a sort of smooth appeal--

"Of course, we all have our opinions and even our eyes, but really
to call them disgusting before the man himself--"

Dr. Bull tore off his spectacles and broke them on the table.

"My spectacles are blackguardly," he said, "but I'm not. Look at
my face."

"I dare say it's the sort of face that grows on one," said the
President, "in fact, it grows on you; and who am I to quarrel
with the wild fruits upon the Tree of Life? I dare say it will
grow on me some day."

"We have no time for tomfoolery," said the Secretary, breaking in
savagely. "We have come to know what all this means. Who are you?
What are you? Why did you get us all here? Do you know who and
what we are? Are you a half-witted man playing the conspirator,
or are you a clever man playing the fool? Answer me, I tell you."

"Candidates," murmured Sunday, "are only required to answer eight
out of the seventeen questions on the paper. As far as I can make
out, you want me to tell you what I am, and what you are, and what
this table is, and what this Council is, and what this world is
for all I know. Well, I will go so far as to rend the veil of one
mystery. If you want to know what you are, you are a set of
highly well-intentioned young jackasses."

"And you," said Syme, leaning forward, "what are you?"

"I? What am I?" roared the President, and he rose slowly to an
incredible height, like some enormous wave about to arch above
them and break. "You want to know what I am, do you? Bull, you
are a man of science. Grub in the roots of those trees and find
out the truth about them. Syme, you are a poet. Stare at those
morning clouds. But I tell you this, that you will have found
out the truth of the last tree and the top-most cloud before the
truth about me. You will understand the sea, and I shall be still
a riddle; you shall know what the stars are, and not know what I
am. Since the beginning of the world all men have hunted me like
a wolf--kings and sages, and poets and lawgivers, all the
churches, and all the philosophies. But I have never been caught
yet, and the skies will fall in the time I turn to bay. I have
given them a good run for their money, and I will now."

Before one of them could move, the monstrous man had swung himself
like some huge ourang-outang over the balustrade of the balcony.
Yet before he dropped he pulled himself up again as on a horizontal
bar, and thrusting his great chin over the edge of the balcony,
said solemnly--

"There's one thing I'll tell you though about who I am. I am the
man in the dark room, who made you all policemen."

With that he fell from the balcony, bouncing on the stones below
like a great ball of india-rubber, and went bounding off towards
the corner of the Alhambra, where he hailed a hansom-cab and sprang
inside it. The six detectives had been standing thunderstruck and
livid in the light of his last assertion; but when he disappeared
into the cab, Syme's practical senses returned to him, and leaping
over the balcony so recklessly as almost to break his legs, he
called another cab.

He and Bull sprang into the cab together, the Professor and the
Inspector into another, while the Secretary and the late Gogol
scrambled into a third just in time to pursue the flying Syme, who
was pursuing the flying President. Sunday led them a wild chase
towards the north-west, his cabman, evidently under the influence
of more than common inducements, urging the horse at breakneck
speed. But Syme was in no mood for delicacies, and he stood up in
his own cab shouting, "Stop thief!" until crowds ran along beside
his cab, and policemen began to stop and ask questions. All this
had its influence upon the President's cabman, who began to look
dubious, and to slow down to a trot. He opened the trap to talk
reasonably to his fare, and in so doing let the long whip droop
over the front of the cab. Sunday leant forward, seized it, and
jerked it violently out of the man's hand. Then standing up in
front of the cab himself, he lashed the horse and roared aloud,
so that they went down the streets like a flying storm. Through
street after street and square after square went whirling this
preposterous vehicle, in which the fare was urging the horse and
the driver trying desperately to stop it. The other three cabs
came after it (if the phrase be permissible of a cab) like panting
hounds. Shops and streets shot by like rattling arrows.

At the highest ecstacy of speed, Sunday turned round on the
splashboard where he stood, and sticking his great grinning head
out of the cab, with white hair whistling in the wind, he made a
horrible face at his pursuers, like some colossal urchin. Then
raising his right hand swiftly, he flung a ball of paper in Syme's
face and vanished. Syme caught the thing while instinctively
warding it off, and discovered that it consisted of two crumpled
papers. One was addressed to himself, and the other to Dr. Bull,
with a very long, and it is to be feared partly ironical, string
of letters after his name. Dr. Bull's address was, at any rate,
considerably longer than his communication, for the communication
consisted entirely of the words:--

"What about Martin Tupper now?"

"What does the old maniac mean?" asked Bull, staring at the words.
"What does yours say, Syme?"

Syme's message was, at any rate, longer, and ran as follows:--

"No one would regret anything in the nature of an interference by
the Archdeacon more than I. I trust it will not come to that. But,
for the last time, where are your goloshes? The thing is too bad,
especially after what uncle said."

The President's cabman seemed to be regaining some control over
his horse, and the pursuers gained a little as they swept round
into the Edgware Road. And here there occurred what seemed to the
allies a providential stoppage. Traffic of every kind was swerving
to right or left or stopping, for down the long road was coming
the unmistakable roar announcing the fire-engine, which in a few
seconds went by like a brazen thunderbolt. But quick as it went
by, Sunday had bounded out of his cab, sprung at the fire-engine,
caught it, slung himself on to it, and was seen as he disappeared
in the noisy distance talking to the astonished fireman with
explanatory gestures.

"After him!" howled Syme. "He can't go astray now. There's no
mistaking a fire-engine."

The three cabmen, who had been stunned for a moment, whipped
up their horses and slightly decreased the distance between
themselves and their disappearing prey. The President
acknowledged this proximity by coming to the back of the car,
bowing repeatedly, kissing his hand, and finally flinging a
neatly-folded note into the bosom of Inspector Ratcliffe. When
that gentleman opened it, not without impatience, he found it
contained the words:--

"Fly at once. The truth about your trouser-stretchers is known.
--A FRIEND."

The fire-engine had struck still farther to the north, into a
region that they did not recognise; and as it ran by a line of high
railings shadowed with trees, the six friends were startled, but
somewhat relieved, to see the President leap from the fire-engine,
though whether through another whim or the increasing protest of
his entertainers they could not see. Before the three cabs,
however, could reach up to the spot, he had gone up the high
railings like a huge grey cat, tossed himself over, and vanished
in a darkness of leaves.

Syme with a furious gesture stopped his cab, jumped out, and
sprang also to the escalade. When he had one leg over the fence
and his friends were following, he turned a face on them which
shone quite pale in the shadow.

"What place can this be?" he asked. "Can it be the old devil's
house? I've heard he has a house in North London."

"All the better," said the Secretary grimly, planting a foot in
a foothold, "we shall find him at home."

"No, but it isn't that," said Syme, knitting his brows. "I hear
the most horrible noises, like devils laughing and sneezing and
blowing their devilish noses!"

"His dogs barking, of course," said the Secretary.

"Why not say his black-beetles barking!" said Syme furiously,
"snails barking! geraniums barking! Did you ever hear a dog bark
like that?"

He held up his hand, and there came out of the thicket a long
growling roar that seemed to get under the skin and freeze the
flesh--a low thrilling roar that made a throbbing in the air
all about them.

"The dogs of Sunday would be no ordinary dogs," said Gogol, and
shuddered.

Syme had jumped down on the other side, but he still stood
listening impatiently.

"Well, listen to that," he said, "is that a dog--anybody's dog?"

There broke upon their ear a hoarse screaming as of things
protesting and clamouring in sudden pain; and then, far off
like an echo, what sounded like a long nasal trumpet.

"Well, his house ought to be hell!" said the Secretary; "and if
it is hell, I'm going in!" and he sprang over the tall railings
almost with one swing.

The others followed. They broke through a tangle of plants and
shrubs, and came out on an open path. Nothing was in sight, but
Dr. Bull suddenly struck his hands together.

"Why, you asses," he cried, "it's the Zoo!"

As they were looking round wildly for any trace of their wild
quarry, a keeper in uniform came running along the path with a
man in plain clothes.

"Has it come this way?" gasped the keeper.

"Has what?" asked Syme.

"The elephant!" cried the keeper. "An elephant has gone mad and
run away!"

"He has run away with an old gentleman," said the other stranger
breathlessly, "a poor old gentleman with white hair! "

"What sort of old gentleman?" asked Syme, with great curiosity.

"A very large and fat old gentleman in light grey clothes," said
the keeper eagerly.

"Well," said Syme, "if he's that particular kind of old gentleman,
if you're quite sure that he's a large and fat old gentleman in
grey clothes, you may take my word for it that the elephant has
not run away with him. He has run away with the elephant. The
elephant is not made by God that could run away with him if he
did not consent to the elopement. And, by thunder, there he is!"

There was no doubt about it this time. Clean across the space of
grass, about two hundred yards away, with a crowd screaming and
scampering vainly at his heels, went a huge grey elephant at an
awful stride, with his trunk thrown out as rigid as a ship's
bowsprit, and trumpeting like the trumpet of doom. On the back of
the bellowing and plunging animal sat President Sunday with all
the placidity of a sultan, but goading the animal to a furious
speed with some sharp object in his hand.

"Stop him!" screamed the populace. "He'll be out of the gate!"

"Stop a landslide!" said the keeper. "He is out of the gate!"

And even as he spoke, a final crash and roar of terror announced
that the great grey elephant had broken out of the gates of the
Zoological Gardens, and was careening down Albany Street like a
new and swift sort of omnibus.

"Great Lord!" cried Bull, "I never knew an elephant could go so
fast. Well, it must be hansom-cabs again if we are to keep him in
sight."

As they raced along to the gate out of which the elephant had
vanished, Syme felt a glaring panorama of the strange animals in
the cages which they passed. Afterwards he thought it queer that
he should have seen them so clearly. He remembered especially
seeing pelicans, with their preposterous, pendant throats. He
wondered why the pelican was the symbol of charity, except it was
that it wanted a good deal of charity to admire a pelican. He
remembered a hornbill, which was simply a huge yellow beak with a
small bird tied on behind it. The whole gave him a sensation, the
vividness of which he could not explain, that Nature was always
making quite mysterious jokes. Sunday had told them that they
would understand him when they had understood the stars. He
wondered whether even the archangels understood the hornbill.

The six unhappy detectives flung themselves into cabs and followed
the elephant sharing the terror which he spread through the long
stretch of the streets. This time Sunday did not turn round, but
offered them the solid stretch of his unconscious back, which
maddened them, if possible, more than his previous mockeries. Just
before they came to Baker Street, however, he was seen to throw
something far up into the air, as a boy does a ball meaning to
catch it again. But at their rate of racing it fell far behind,
just by the cab containing Gogol; and in faint hope of a clue or
for some impulse unexplainable, he stopped his cab so as to pick it
up. It was addressed to himself, and was quite a bulky parcel. On
examination, however, its bulk was found to consist of thirty-three
pieces of paper of no value wrapped one round the other. When the
last covering was torn away it reduced itself to a small slip of
paper, on which was written:--

"The word, I fancy, should be 'pink'."

The man once known as Gogol said nothing, but the movements of his
hands and feet were like those of a man urging a horse to renewed
efforts.

Through street after street, through district after district, went
the prodigy of the flying elephant, calling crowds to every window,
and driving the traffic left and right. And still through all this
insane publicity the three cabs toiled after it, until they came to
be regarded as part of a procession, and perhaps the advertisement
of a circus. They went at such a rate that distances were shortened
beyond belief, and Syme saw the Albert Hall in Kensington when he
thought that he was still in Paddington. The animal's pace was even
more fast and free through the empty, aristocratic streets of South
Kensington, and he finally headed towards that part of the sky-line
where the enormous Wheel of Earl's Court stood up in the sky. The
wheel grew larger and larger, till it filled heaven like the wheel
of stars.

The beast outstripped the cabs. They lost him round several
corners, and when they came to one of the gates of the Earl's Court
Exhibition they found themselves finally blocked. In front of them
was an enormous crowd; in the midst of it was an enormous elephant,
heaving and shuddering as such shapeless creatures do. But the
President had disappeared.

"Where has he gone to?" asked Syme, slipping to the ground.

"Gentleman rushed into the Exhibition, sir!" said an official in a
dazed manner. Then he added in an injured voice: "Funny gentleman,
sir. Asked me to hold his horse, and gave me this."

He held out with distaste a piece of folded paper, addressed: "To
the Secretary of the Central Anarchist Council."

The Secretary, raging, rent it open, and found written inside it:--

"When the herring runs a mile,
Let the Secretary smile;
When the herring tries to fly,
Let the Secretary die.
                Rustic Proverb."

"Why the eternal crikey," began the Secretary, "did you let the
man in? Do people commonly come to you Exhibition riding on mad
elephants? Do--"

"Look!" shouted Syme suddenly. "Look over there!"

"Look at what?" asked the Secretary savagely.

"Look at the captive balloon!" said Syme, and pointed in a frenzy.

"Why the blazes should I look at a captive balloon?' demanded the
Secretary. "What is there queer about a captive balloon?"

"Nothing," said Syme, "except that it isn't captive!'

They all turned their eyes to where the balloon swung and swelled
above the Exhibition on a string, like a child's balloon. A second
afterwards the string came in two just under the car, and the
balloon, broken loose, floated away with the freedom of a soap
bubble.

"Ten thousand devils!" shrieked the Secretary. "He's got into it!"
and he shook his fists at the sky.

The balloon, borne by some chance wind, came right above them, and
they could see the great white head of the President peering over
the side and looking benevolently down on them.

"God bless my soul!" said the Professor with the elderly manner
that he could never disconnect from his bleached beard and
parchment face. "God bless my soul! I seemed to fancy that
something fell on the top of my hat!"

He put up a trembling hand and took from that shelf a piece of
twisted paper, which he opened absently only to find it inscribed
with a true lover's knot and, the words:--

"Your beauty has not left me indifferent.--From LITTLE SNOWDROP. "

There was a short silence, and then Syme said, biting his beard--

"I'm not beaten yet. The blasted thing must come down somewhere.
Let's follow it!"



CHAPTER XIV

THE SIX PHILOSOPHERS

ACROSS green fields, and breaking through blooming hedges, toiled
six draggled detectives, about five miles out of London. The
optimist of the party had at first proposed that they should
follow the balloon across South England in hansom-cabs. But he
was ultimately convinced of the persistent refusal of the balloon
to follow the roads, and the still more persistent refusal of the
cabmen to follow the balloon. Consequently the tireless though
exasperated travellers broke through black thickets and ploughed
through ploughed fields till each was turned into a figure too
outrageous to be mistaken for a tramp. Those green hills of
Surrey saw the final collapse and tragedy of the admirable light
grey suit in which Syme had set out from Saffron Park. His silk
hat was broken over his nose by a swinging bough, his coat-tails
were torn to the shoulder by arresting thorns, the clay of
England was splashed up to his collar; but he still carried his
yellow beard forward with a silent and furious determination, and
his eyes were still fixed on that floating ball of gas, which in
the full flush of sunset seemed coloured like a sunset cloud.

"After all," he said, "it is very beautiful!"

"It is singularly and strangely beautiful!" said the Professor. "I
wish the beastly gas-bag would burst!"

"No," said Dr. Bull, "I hope it won't. It might hurt the old boy."

"Hurt him!" said the vindictive Professor, "hurt him! Not as much
as I'd hurt him if I could get up with him. Little Snowdrop!"

"I don't want him hurt, somehow," said Dr. Bull.

"What!" cried the Secretary bitterly. "Do you believe all that tale
about his being our man in the dark room? Sunday would say he was
anybody."

"I don't know whether I believe it or not," said Dr. Bull. "But it
isn't that that I mean. I can't wish old Sunday's balloon to burst
because--"

"Well," said Syme impatiently, "because?"

"Well, because he's so jolly like a balloon himself," said Dr. Bull
desperately. "I don't understand a word of all that idea of his
being the same man who gave us all our blue cards. It seems to make
everything nonsense. But I don't care who knows it, I always had a
sympathy for old Sunday himself, wicked as he was. Just as if he
was a great bouncing baby. How can I explain what my queer sympathy
was? It didn't prevent my fighting him like hell! Shall I make it
clear if I say that I liked him because he was so fat?"

"You will not," said the Secretary.

"I've got it now," cried Bull, "it was because he was so fat and so
light. Just like a balloon. We always think of fat people as heavy,
but he could have danced against a sylph. I see now what I mean.
Moderate strength is shown in violence, supreme strength is shown
in levity. It was like the old speculations--what would happen if
an elephant could leap up in the sky like a grasshopper?"

"Our elephant," said Syme, looking upwards, "has leapt into the
sky like a grasshopper."

"And somehow," concluded Bull, "that's why I can't help liking old
Sunday. No, it's not an admiration of force, or any silly thing
like that. There is a kind of gaiety in the thing, as if he were
bursting with some good news. Haven't you sometimes felt it on a
spring day? You know Nature plays tricks, but somehow that day
proves they are good-natured tricks. I never read the Bible myself,
but that part they laugh at is literal truth, 'Why leap ye, ye high
hills?' The hills do leap--at least, they try to. . . . Why do I
like Sunday? . . . how can I tell you? . . . because he's such a
Bounder."

There was a long silence, and then the Secretary said in a curious,
strained voice--

"You do not know Sunday at all. Perhaps it is because you are
better than I, and do not know hell. I was a fierce fellow, and a
trifle morbid from the first. The man who sits in darkness, and
who chose us all, chose me because I had all the crazy look of a
conspirator--because my smile went crooked, and my eyes were
gloomy, even when I smiled. But there must have been something in
me that answered to the nerves in all these anarchic men. For when
I first saw Sunday he expressed to me, not your airy vitality, but
something both gross and sad in the Nature of Things. I found him
smoking in a twilight room, a room with brown blind down,
infinitely more depressing than the genial darkness in which our
master lives. He sat there on a bench, a huge heap of a man, dark
and out of shape. He listened to all my words without speaking or
even stirring. I poured out my most passionate appeals, and asked
my most eloquent questions. Then, after a long silence, the Thing
began to shake, and I thought it was shaken by some secret malady.
It shook like a loathsome and living jelly. It reminded me of
everything I had ever read about the base bodies that are the
origin of life--the deep sea lumps and protoplasm. It seemed like
the final form of matter, the most shapeless and the most shameful.
I could only tell myself, from its shudderings, that it was
something at least that such a monster could be miserable. And
then it broke upon me that the bestial mountain was shaking with
a lonely laughter, and the laughter was at me. Do you ask me to
forgive him that? It is no small thing to be laughed at by
something at once lower and stronger than oneself."

"Surely you fellows are exaggerating wildly," cut in the clear
voice of Inspector Ratcliffe. "President Sunday is a terrible
fellow for one's intellect, but he is not such a Barnum's freak
physically as you make out. He received me in an ordinary office,
in a grey check coat, in broad daylight. He talked to me in an
ordinary way. But I'll tell you what is a trifle creepy about
Sunday. His room is neat, his clothes are neat, everything seems
in order; but he's absent-minded. Sometimes his great bright eyes
go quite blind. For hours he forgets that you are there. Now
absent-mindedness is just a bit too awful in a bad man. We think
of a wicked man as vigilant. We can't think of a wicked man who is
honestly and sincerely dreamy, because we daren't think of a wicked
man alone with himself. An absentminded man means a good-natured
man. It means a man who, if he happens to see you, will apologise.
But how will you bear an absentminded man who, if he happens to see
you, will kill you? That is what tries the nerves, abstraction
combined with cruelty. Men have felt it sometimes when they went
through wild forests, and felt that the animals there were at once
innocent and pitiless. They might ignore or slay. How would you
like to pass ten mortal hours in a parlour with an absent-minded
tiger?"

"And what do you think of Sunday, Gogol?" asked Syme.

"I don't think of Sunday on principle," said Gogol simply, "any
more than I stare at the sun at noonday."

"Well, that is a point of view," said Syme thoughtfully. "What do
you say, Professor?"

The Professor was walking with bent head and trailing stick, and
he did not answer at all.

"Wake up, Professor!" said Syme genially. "Tell us what you think
of Sunday."

The Professor spoke at last very slowly.

"I think something," he said, "that I cannot say clearly. Or,
rather, I think something that I cannot even think clearly. But
it is something like this. My early life, as you know, was a bit
too large and loose.

Well, when I saw Sunday's face I thought it was too large--
everybody does, but I also thought it was too loose. The face
was so big, that one couldn't focus it or make it a face at all.
The eye was so far away from the nose, that it wasn't an eye.
The mouth was so much by itself, that one had to think of it by
itself. The whole thing is too hard to explain."

He paused for a little, still trailing his stick, and then went
on--

"But put it this way. Walking up a road at night, I have seen a
lamp and a lighted window and a cloud make together a most complete
and unmistakable face. If anyone in heaven has that face I shall
know him again. Yet when I walked a little farther I found that
there was no face, that the window was ten yards away, the lamp ten
hundred yards, the cloud beyond the world. Well, Sunday's face
escaped me; it ran away to right and left, as such chance pictures
run away. And so his face has made me, somehow, doubt whether there
are any faces. I don't know whether your face, Bull, is a face or a
combination in perspective. Perhaps one black disc of your beastly
glasses is quite close and another fifty miles away. Oh, the doubts
of a materialist are not worth a dump. Sunday has taught me the
last and the worst doubts, the doubts of a spiritualist. I am a
Buddhist, I suppose; and Buddhism is not a creed, it is a doubt. My
poor dear Bull, I do not believe that you really have a face. I
have not faith enough to believe in matter."

Syme's eyes were still fixed upon the errant orb, which, reddened
in the evening light, looked like some rosier and more innocent
world.

"Have you noticed an odd thing," he said, "about all your
descriptions? Each man of you finds Sunday quite different, yet
each man of you can only find one thing to compare him to--the
universe itself. Bull finds him like the earth in spring, Gogol
like the sun at noonday. The Secretary is reminded of the shapeless
protoplasm, and the Inspector of the carelessness of virgin
forests. The Professor says he is like a changing landscape. This
is queer, but it is queerer still that I also have had my odd
notion about the President, and I also find that I think of Sunday
as I think of the whole world."

"Get on a little faster, Syme," said Bull; "never mind the
balloon."

"When I first saw Sunday," said Syme slowly, "I only saw his back;
and when I saw his back, I knew he was the worst man in the world.
His neck and shoulders were brutal, like those of some apish god.
His head had a stoop that was hardly human, like the stoop of an
ox. In fact, I had at once the revolting fancy that this was not
a man at all, but a beast dressed up in men's clothes."

"Get on," said Dr. Bull.

"And then the queer thing happened. I had seen his back from the
street, as he sat in the balcony. Then I entered the hotel, and
coming round the other side of him, saw his face in the sunlight.
His face frightened me, as it did everyone; but not because it was
brutal, not because it was evil. On the contrary, it frightened me
because it was so beautiful, because it was so good."

"Syme," exclaimed the Secretary, "are you ill?"

"It was like the face of some ancient archangel, judging justly
after heroic wars. There was laughter in the eyes, and in the mouth
honour and sorrow. There was the same white hair, the same great,
grey-clad shoulders that I had seen from behind. But when I saw him
from behind I was certain he was an animal, and when I saw him in
front I knew he was a god."

"Pan," said the Professor dreamily, "was a god and an animal."

"Then, and again and always," went on Syme like a man talking to
himself, "that has been for me the mystery of Sunday, and it is
also the mystery of the world. When I see the horrible back, I am
sure the noble face is but a mask. When I see the face but for an
instant, I know the back is only a jest. Bad is so bad, that we
cannot but think good an accident; good is so good, that we feel
certain that evil could be explained. But the whole came to a kind
of crest yesterday when I raced Sunday for the cab, and was just
behind him all the way."

"Had you time for thinking then?" asked Ratcliffe.

"Time," replied Syme, "for one outrageous thought. I was suddenly
possessed with the idea that the blind, blank back of his head
really was his face--an awful, eyeless face staring at me! And I
fancied that the figure running in front of me was really a figure
running backwards, and dancing as he ran."

"Horrible!" said Dr. Bull, and shuddered.

"Horrible is not the word," said Syme. "It was exactly the worst
instant of my life. And yet ten minutes afterwards, when he put his
head out of the cab and made a grimace like a gargoyle, I knew that
he was only like a father playing hide-and-seek with his children."

"It is a long game," said the Secretary, and frowned at his broken
boots.

"Listen to me," cried Syme with extraordinary emphasis. "Shall I
tell you the secret of the whole world? It is that we have only
known the back of the world. We see everything from behind, and it
looks brutal. That is not a tree, but the back of a tree. That is
not a cloud, but the back of a cloud. Cannot you see that
everything is stooping and hiding a face? If we could only get
round in front--"

"Look!" cried out Bull clamorously, "the balloon is coming down!"

There was no need to cry out to Syme, who had never taken his eyes
off it. He saw the great luminous globe suddenly stagger in the
sky, right itself, and then sink slowly behind the trees like a
setting sun.

The man called Gogol, who had hardly spoken through all their weary
travels, suddenly threw up his hands like a lost spirit.

"He is dead!" he cried. "And now I know he was my friend--my friend
in the dark!"

"Dead!" snorted the Secretary. "You will not find him dead easily.
If he has been tipped out of the car, we shall find him rolling as
a colt rolls in a field, kicking his legs for fun."

"Clashing his hoofs," said the Professor. "The colts do, and so did
Pan."

"Pan again!" said Dr. Bull irritably. "You seem to think Pan is
everything."

"So he is," said the Professor, "in Greek. He means everything."

"Don't forget," said the Secretary, looking down, "that he also
means Panic."

Syme had stood without hearing any of the exclamations.

"It fell over there," he said shortly. "Let us follow it!"

Then he added with an indescribable gesture--

"Oh, if he has cheated us all by getting killed! It would be like
one of his larks."

He strode off towards the distant trees with a new energy, his rags
and ribbons fluttering in the wind. The others followed him in a
more footsore and dubious manner. And almost at the same moment all
six men realised that they were not alone in the little field.

Across the square of turf a tall man was advancing towards them,
leaning on a strange long staff like a sceptre. He was clad in a
fine but old-fashioned suit with knee-breeches; its colour was
that shade between blue, violet and grey which can be seen in
certain shadows of the woodland. His hair was whitish grey, and
at the first glance, taken along with his knee-breeches, looked
as if it was powdered. His advance was very quiet; but for the
silver frost upon his head, he might have been one to the shadows
of the wood.

"Gentlemen," he said, "my master has a carriage waiting for you in
the road just by."

"Who is your master?" asked Syme, standing quite still.

"I was told you knew his name," said the man respectfully.

There was a silence, and then the Secretary said--

"Where is this carriage?"

"It has been waiting only a few moments," said the stranger. "My
master has only just come home."

Syme looked left and right upon the patch of green field in which
he found himself. The hedges were ordinary hedges, the trees seemed
ordinary trees; yet he felt like a man entrapped in fairyland.

He looked the mysterious ambassador up and down, but he could
discover nothing except that the man's coat was the exact colour of
the purple shadows, and that the man's face was the exact colour of
the red and brown and golden sky.

"Show us the place," Syme said briefly, and without a word the man
in the violet coat turned his back and walked towards a gap in the
hedge, which let in suddenly the light of a white road.

As the six wanderers broke out upon this thoroughfare, they saw the
white road blocked by what looked like a long row of carriages,
such a row of carriages as might close the approach to some house
in Park Lane. Along the side of these carriages stood a rank of
splendid servants, all dressed in the grey-blue uniform, and all
having a certain quality of stateliness and freedom which would not
commonly belong to the servants of a gentleman, but rather to the
officials and ambassadors of a great king. There were no less than
six carriages waiting, one for each of the tattered and miserable
band. All the attendants (as if in court-dress) wore swords, and as
each man crawled into his carriage they drew them, and saluted with
a sudden blaze of steel.

"What can it all mean?" asked Bull of Syme as they separated. "Is
this another joke of Sunday's?"

"I don't know," said Syme as he sank wearily back in the cushions
of his carriage; "but if it is, it's one of the jokes you talk
about. It's a good-natured one."

The six adventurers had passed through many adventures, but not one
had carried them so utterly off their feet as this last adventure
of comfort. They had all become inured to things going roughly; but
things suddenly going smoothly swamped them. They could not even
feebly imagine what the carriages were; it was enough for them to
know that they were carriages, and carriages with cushions. They
could not conceive who the old man was who had led them; but it was
quite enough that he had certainly led them to the carriages.

Syme drove through a drifting darkness of trees in utter
abandonment. It was typical of him that while he had carried his
bearded chin forward fiercely so long as anything could be done,
when the whole business was taken out of his hands he fell back
on the cushions in a frank collapse.

Very gradually and very vaguely he realised into what rich roads
the carriage was carrying him. He saw that they passed the stone
gates of what might have been a park, that they began gradually to
climb a hill which, while wooded on both sides, was somewhat more
orderly than a forest. Then there began to grow upon him, as upon a
man slowly waking from a healthy sleep, a pleasure in everything.
He felt that the hedges were what hedges should be, living walls;
that a hedge is like a human army, disciplined, but all the more
alive. He saw high elms behind the hedges, and vaguely thought how
happy boys would be climbing there. Then his carriage took a turn
of the path, and he saw suddenly and quietly, like a long, low,
sunset cloud, a long, low house, mellow in the mild light of
sunset. All the six friends compared notes afterwards and
quarrelled; but they all agreed that in some unaccountable way the
place reminded them of their boyhood. It was either this elm-top
or that crooked path, it was either this scrap of orchard or that
shape of a window; but each man of them declared that he could
remember this place before he could remember his mother.

When the carriages eventually rolled up to a large, low, cavernous
gateway, another man in the same uniform, but wearing a silver star
on the grey breast of his coat, came out to meet them. This
impressive person said to the bewildered Syme--

"Refreshments are provided for you in your room."

Syme, under the influence of the same mesmeric sleep of amazement,
went up the large oaken stairs after the respectful attendant. He
entered a splendid suite of apartments that seemed to be designed
specially for him. He walked up to a long mirror with the ordinary
instinct of his class, to pull his tie straight or to smooth his
hair; and there he saw the frightful figure that he was--blood
running down his face from where the bough had struck him, his hair
standing out like yellow rags of rank grass, his clothes torn into
long, wavering tatters. At once the whole enigma sprang up, simply
as the question of how he had got there, and how he was to get out
again. Exactly at the same moment a man in blue, who had been
appointed as his valet, said very solemnly--

"I have put out your clothes, sir."

"Clothes!" said Syme sardonically. "I have no clothes except
these," and he lifted two long strips of his frock-coat in
fascinating festoons, and made a movement as if to twirl like
a ballet girl.

"My master asks me to say," said the attendant, that there is a
fancy dress ball tonight, and that he desires you to put on the
costume that I have laid out. Meanwhile, sir, there is a bottle
of Burgundy and some cold pheasant, which he hopes you will not
refuse, as it is some hours before supper."

"Cold pheasant is a good thing," said Syme reflectively, "and
Burgundy is a spanking good thing. But really I do not want either
of them so much as I want to know what the devil all this means,
and what sort of costume you have got laid out for me. Where is
it?"

The servant lifted off a kind of ottoman a long peacock-blue
drapery, rather of the nature of a domino, on the front of which
was emblazoned a large golden sun, and which was splashed here
and there with flaming stars and crescents.

"You're to be dressed as Thursday, sir," said the valet somewhat
affably.

"Dressed as Thursday!" said Syme in meditation. "It doesn't sound
a warm costume."

"Oh, yes, sir," said the other eagerly, "the Thursday costume is
quite warm, sir. It fastens up to the chin."

"Well, I don't understand anything," said Syme, sighing. "I have
been used so long to uncomfortable adventures that comfortable
adventures knock me out. Still, I may be allowed to ask why I
should be particularly like Thursday in a green frock spotted
all over with the sun and moon. Those orbs, I think, shine on
other days. I once saw the moon on Tuesday, I remember."

"Beg pardon, sir," said the valet, "Bible also provided for you,"
and with a respectful and rigid finger he pointed out a passage
in the first chapter of Genesis. Syme read it wondering. It was
that in which the fourth day of the week is associated with the
creation of the sun and moon. Here, however, they reckoned from
a Christian Sunday.

"This is getting wilder and wilder," said Syme, as he sat down
in a chair. "Who are these people who provide cold pheasant and
Burgundy, and green clothes and Bibles? Do they provide
everything?"

"Yes, sir, everything," said the attendant gravely. "Shall I help
you on with your costume?"

"Oh, hitch the bally thing on!" said Syme impatiently.

But though he affected to despise the mummery, he felt a curious
freedom and naturalness in his movements as the blue and gold
garment fell about him; and when he found that he had to wear a
sword, it stirred a boyish dream. As he passed out of the room he
flung the folds across his shoulder with a gesture, his sword
stood out at an angle, and he had all the swagger of a troubadour.
For these disguises did not disguise, but reveal.



CHAPTER XV

THE ACCUSER

AS Syme strode along the corridor he saw the Secretary standing at
the top of a great flight of stairs. The man had never looked so
noble. He was draped in a long robe of starless black, down the
centre of which fell a band or broad stripe of pure white, like a
single shaft of light. The whole looked like some very severe
ecclesiastical vestment. There was no need for Syme to search his
memory or the Bible in order to remember that the first day of
creation marked the mere creation of light out of darkness. The
vestment itself would alone have suggested the symbol; and Syme
felt also how perfectly this pattern of pure white and black
expressed the soul of the pale and austere Secretary, with his
inhuman veracity and his cold frenzy, which made him so easily
make war on the anarchists, and yet so easily pass for one of
them. Syme was scarcely surprised to notice that, amid all the
ease and hospitality of their new surroundings, this man's eyes
were still stern. No smell of ale or orchards could make the
Secretary cease to ask a reasonable question.

If Syme had been able to see himself, he would have realised that
he, too, seemed to be for the first time himself and no one else.
For if the Secretary stood for that philosopher who loves the
original and formless light, Syme was a type of the poet who seeks
always to make the light in special shapes, to split it up into
sun and star. The philosopher may sometimes love the infinite; the
poet always loves the finite. For him the great moment is not the
creation of light, but the creation of the sun and moon.

As they descended the broad stairs together they overtook
Ratcliffe, who was clad in spring green like a huntsman, and the
pattern upon whose garment was a green tangle of trees. For he
stood for that third day on which the earth and green things were
made, and his square, sensible face, with its not unfriendly
cynicism, seemed appropriate enough to it.

They were led out of another broad and low gateway into a very
large old English garden, full of torches and bonfires, by the
broken light of which a vast carnival of people were dancing in
motley dress. Syme seemed to see every shape in Nature imitated
in some crazy costume. There was a man dressed as a windmill with
enormous sails, a man dressed as an elephant, a man dressed as a
balloon; the two last, together, seemed to keep the thread of
their farcical adventures. Syme even saw, with a queer thrill,
one dancer dressed like an enormous hornbill, with a beak twice
as big as himself--the queer bird which had fixed itself on his
fancy like a living question while he was rushing down the long
road at the Zoological Gardens. There were a thousand other such
objects, however. There was a dancing lamp-post, a dancing apple
tree, a dancing ship. One would have thought that the untamable
tune of some mad musician had set all the common objects of field
and street dancing an eternal jig. And long afterwards, when Syme
was middle-aged and at rest, he could never see one of those
particular objects--a lamppost, or an apple tree, or a windmill--
without thinking that it was a strayed reveller from that revel
of masquerade.

On one side of this lawn, alive with dancers, was a sort of green
bank, like the terrace in such old-fashioned gardens.

Along this, in a kind of crescent, stood seven great chairs, the
thrones of the seven days. Gogol and Dr. Bull were already in their
seats; the Professor was just mounting to his. Gogol, or Tuesday,
had his simplicity well symbolised by a dress designed upon the
division of the waters, a dress that separated upon his forehead
and fell to his feet, grey and silver, like a sheet of rain. The
Professor, whose day was that on which the birds and fishes--the
ruder forms of life--were created, had a dress of dim purple, over
which sprawled goggle-eyed fishes and outrageous tropical birds,
the union in him of unfathomable fancy and of doubt. Dr. Bull, the
last day of Creation, wore a coat covered with heraldic animals in
red and gold, and on his crest a man rampant. He lay back in his
chair with a broad smile, the picture of an optimist in his
element.

One by one the wanderers ascended the bank and sat in their
strange seats. As each of them sat down a roar of enthusiasm rose
from the carnival, such as that with which crowds receive kings.
Cups were clashed and torches shaken, and feathered hats flung in
the air. The men for whom these thrones were reserved were men
crowned with some extraordinary laurels. But the central chair was
empty.

Syme was on the left hand of it and the Secretary on the right.
The Secretary looked across the empty throne at Syme, and said,
compressing his lips--

"We do not know yet that he is not dead in a field."

Almost as Syme heard the words, he saw on the sea of human faces in
front of him a frightful and beautiful alteration, as if heaven had
opened behind his head. But Sunday had only passed silently along
the front like a shadow, and had sat in the central seat. He was
draped plainly, in a pure and terrible white, and his hair was like
a silver flame on his forehead.

For a long time--it seemed for hours--that huge masquerade of
mankind swayed and stamped in front of them to marching and
exultant music. Every couple dancing seemed a separate romance;
it might be a fairy dancing with a pillar-box, or a peasant girl
dancing with the moon; but in each case it was, somehow, as
absurd as Alice in Wonderland, yet as grave and kind as a love
story. At last, however, the thick crowd began to thin itself.
Couples strolled away into the garden-walks, or began to drift
towards that end of the building where stood smoking, in huge
pots like fish-kettles, some hot and scented mixtures of old ale
or wine. Above all these, upon a sort of black framework on the
roof of the house, roared in its iron basket a gigantic bonfire,
which lit up the land for miles. It flung the homely effect of
firelight over the face of vast forests of grey or brown, and it
seemed to fill with warmth even the emptiness of upper night.
Yet this also, after a time, was allowed to grow fainter; the
dim groups gathered more and more round the great cauldrons, or
passed, laughing and clattering, into the inner passages of that
ancient house. Soon there were only some ten loiterers in the
garden; soon only four. Finally the last stray merry-maker ran
into the house whooping to his companions. The fire faded, and
the slow, strong stars came out. And the seven strange men were
left alone, like seven stone statues on their chairs of stone.
Not one of them had spoken a word.

They seemed in no haste to do so, but heard in silence the hum of
insects and the distant song of one bird. Then Sunday spoke, but
so dreamily that he might have been continuing a conversation
rather than beginning one.

"We will eat and drink later," he said. "Let us remain together a
little, we who have loved each other so sadly, and have fought so
long. I seem to remember only centuries of heroic war, in which
you were always heroes--epic on epic, iliad on iliad, and you
always brothers in arms. Whether it was but recently (for time is
nothing), or at the beginning of the world, I sent you out to
war. I sat in the darkness, where there is not any created thing,
and to you I was only a voice commanding valour and an unnatural
virtue. You heard the voice in the dark, and you never heard it
again. The sun in heaven denied it, the earth and sky denied it,
all human wisdom denied it. And when I met you in the daylight I
denied it myself."

Syme stirred sharply in his seat, but otherwise there was silence,
and the incomprehensible went on.

"But you were men. You did not forget your secret honour, though
the whole cosmos turned an engine of torture to tear it out of
you. I knew how near you were to hell. I know how you, Thursday,
crossed swords with King Satan, and how you, Wednesday, named me
in the hour without hope."

There was complete silence in the starlit garden, and then the
black-browed Secretary, implacable, turned in his chair towards
Sunday, and said in a harsh voice--

"Who and what are you?"

"I am the Sabbath," said the other without moving. "I am the peace
of God."

The Secretary started up, and stood crushing his costly robe in his
hand.

"I know what you mean," he cried, "and it is exactly that that I
cannot forgive you. I know you are contentment, optimism, what do
they call the thing, an ultimate reconciliation. Well, I am not
reconciled. If you were the man in the dark room, why were you also
Sunday, an offense to the sunlight? If you were from the first our
father and our friend, why were you also our greatest enemy? We
wept, we fled in terror; the iron entered into our souls--and you
are the peace of God! Oh, I can forgive God His anger, though it
destroyed nations; but I cannot forgive Him His peace."

Sunday answered not a word, but very slowly he turned his face of
stone upon Syme as if asking a question.

"No," said Syme, "I do not feel fierce like that. I am grateful
to you, not only for wine and hospitality here, but for many a
fine scamper and free fight. But I should like to know. My soul
and heart are as happy and quiet here as this old garden, but my
reason is still crying out. I should like to know."

Sunday looked at Ratcliffe, whose clear voice said--

"It seems so silly that you should have been on both sides and
fought yourself."

Bull said--

"l understand nothing, but I am happy. In fact, I am going to
sleep."

"I am not happy," said the Professor with his head in his hands,
"because I do not understand. You let me stray a little too near
to hell."

And then Gogol said, with the absolute simplicity of a child--

"I wish I knew why I was hurt so much."

Still Sunday said nothing, but only sat with his mighty chin upon
his hand, and gazed at the distance. Then at last he said--

"I have heard your complaints in order. And here, I think, comes
another to complain, and we will hear him also."

The falling fire in the great cresset threw a last long gleam, like
a bar of burning gold, across the dim grass. Against this fiery
band was outlined in utter black the advancing legs of a black-clad
figure. He seemed to have a fine close suit with knee-breeches such
as that which was worn by the servants of the house, only that it
was not blue, but of this absolute sable. He had, like the
servants, a kind of word by his side. It was only when he had come
quite close to the crescent of the seven and flung up his face to
look at them, that Syme saw, with thunder-struck clearness, that
the face was the broad, almost ape-like face of his old friend
Gregory, with its rank red hair and its insulting smile.

"Gregory!" gasped Syme, half-rising from his seat. "Why, this is
the real anarchist!"

"Yes," said Gregory, with a great and dangerous restraint, "I am
the real anarchist."

"'Now there was a day,'" murmured Bull, who seemed really to have
fallen asleep, "'when the sons of God came to present themselves
before the Lord, and Satan came also among them.'"

"You are right," said Gregory, and gazed all round. "I am a
destroyer. I would destroy the world if I could."

A sense of a pathos far under the earth stirred up in Syme, and
he spoke brokenly and without sequence.

"Oh, most unhappy man," he cried, "try to be happy! You have red
hair like your sister."

"My red hair, like red flames, shall burn up the world," said
Gregory. "I thought I hated everything more than common men can
hate anything; but I find that I do not hate everything so much
as I hate you! "

"I never hated you," said Syme very sadly.

Then out of this unintelligible creature the last thunders broke.

"You!" he cried. "You never hated because you never lived. I know
what you are all of you, from first to last--you are the people
in power! You are the police--the great fat, smiling men in blue
and buttons! You are the Law, and you have never been broken. But
is there a free soul alive that does not long to break you, only
because you have never been broken? We in revolt talk all kind of
nonsense doubtless about this crime or that crime of the
Government. It is all folly! The only crime of the Government is
that it governs. The unpardonable sin of the supreme power is
that it is supreme. I do not curse you for being cruel. I do not
curse you (though I might) for being kind. I curse you for being
safe! You sit in your chairs of stone, and have never come down
from them. You are the seven angels of heaven, and you have had
no troubles. Oh, I could forgive you everything, you that rule
all mankind, if I could feel for once that you had suffered for
one hour a real agony such as I--"

Syme sprang to his feet, shaking from head to foot.

"I see everything," he cried, "everything that there is. Why does
each thing on the earth war against each other thing? Why does
each small thing in the world have to fight against the world
itself? Why does a fly have to fight the whole universe? Why does
a dandelion have to fight the whole universe? For the same reason
that I had to be alone in the dreadful Council of the Days. So
that each thing that obeys law may have the glory and isolation of
the anarchist. So that each man fighting for order may be as brave
and good a man as the dynamiter. So that the real lie of Satan may
be flung back in the face of this blasphemer, so that by tears and
torture we may earn the right to say to this man, 'You lie!' No
agonies can be too great to buy the right to say to this accuser,
'We also have suffered.'

"It is not true that we have never been broken. We have been broken
upon the wheel. It is not true that we have never descended from
these thrones. We have descended into hell. We were complaining of
unforgettable miseries even at the very moment when this man
entered insolently to accuse us of happiness. I repel the slander;
we have not been happy. I can answer for every one of the great
guards of Law whom he has accused. At least--"

He had turned his eyes so as to see suddenly the great face of
Sunday, which wore a strange smile.

"Have you," he cried in a dreadful voice, "have you ever suffered?"

As he gazed, the great face grew to an awful size, grew larger than
the colossal mask of Memnon, which had made him scream as a child.
It grew larger and larger, filling the whole sky; then everything
went black. Only in the blackness before it entirely destroyed his
brain he seemed to hear a distant voice saying a commonplace text
that he had heard somewhere, "Can ye drink of the cup that I drink
of?"

*    *    *

When men in books awake from a vision, they commonly find
themselves in some place in which they might have fallen asleep;
they yawn in a chair, or lift themselves with bruised limbs from a
field. Syme's experience was something much more psychologically
strange if there was indeed anything unreal, in the earthly sense,
about the things he had gone through. For while he could always
remember afterwards that he had swooned before the face of Sunday,
he could not remember having ever come to at all. He could only
remember that gradually and naturally he knew that he was and had
been walking along a country lane with an easy and conversational
companion. That companion had been a part of his recent drama; it
was the red-haired poet Gregory. They were walking like old
friends, and were in the middle of a conversation about some
triviality. But Syme could only feel an unnatural buoyancy in his
body and a crystal simplicity in his mind that seemed to be
superior to everything that he said or did. He felt he was in
possession of some impossible good news, which made every other
thing a triviality, but an adorable triviality.

Dawn was breaking over everything in colours at once clear and
timid; as if Nature made a first attempt at yellow and a first
attempt at rose. A breeze blew so clean and sweet, that one could
not think that it blew from the sky; it blew rather through some
hole in the sky. Syme felt a simple surprise when he saw rising all
round him on both sides of the road the red, irregular buildings of
Saffron Park. He had no idea that he had walked so near London. He
walked by instinct along one white road, on which early birds
hopped and sang, and found himself outside a fenced garden. There
he saw the sister of Gregory, the girl with the gold-red hair,
cutting lilac before breakfast, with the great unconscious gravity
of a girl.

[The Ball and The Cross by G.K. Chesterton 1909]


I. A DISCUSSION SOMEWHAT IN THE AIR

The flying ship of Professor Lucifer sang through the skies like
a silver arrow; the bleak white steel of it, gleaming in the
bleak blue emptiness of the evening.  That it was far above the
earth was no expression for it; to the two men in it, it seemed
to be far above the stars.  The professor had himself invented
the flying machine, and had also invented nearly everything in
it.  Every sort of tool or apparatus had, in consequence, to the
full, that fantastic and distorted look which belongs to the
miracles of science.  For the world of science and evolution is
far more nameless and elusive and like a dream than the world of
poetry and religion; since in the latter images and ideas remain
themselves eternally, while it is the whole idea of evolution
that identities melt into each other as they do in a nightmare.

All the tools of Professor Lucifer were the ancient human tools
gone mad, grown into unrecognizable shapes, forgetful of their
origin, forgetful of their names.  That thing which looked like an
enormous key with three wheels was really a patent and very
deadly revolver.  That object which seemed to be created by the
entanglement of two corkscrews was really the key.  The thing
which might have been mistaken for a tricycle turned upside-down
was the inexpressibly important instrument to which the corkscrew
was the key.  All these things, as I say, the professor had
invented; he had invented everything in the flying ship, with the
exception, perhaps, of himself.  This he had been born too late
actually to inaugurate, but he believed at least, that he had
considerably improved it.

There was, however, another man on board, so to speak, at the
time.  Him, also, by a curious coincidence, the professor had not
invented, and him he had not even very greatly improved, though
he had fished him up with a lasso out of his own back garden, in
Western Bulgaria, with the pure object of improving him.  He was
an exceedingly holy man, almost entirely covered with white hair.
You could see nothing but his eyes, and he seemed to talk with
them.  A monk of immense learning and acute intellect he had made
himself happy in a little stone hut and a little stony garden in
the Balkans, chiefly by writing the most crushing refutations of
exposures of certain heresies, the last professors of which had
been burnt (generally by each other) precisely 1,119 years
previously.  They were really very plausible and thoughtful
heresies, and it was really a creditable or even glorious
circumstance, that the old monk had been intellectual enough to
detect their fallacy; the only misfortune was that nobody in the
modern world was intellectual enough even to understand their
argument.  The old monk, one of whose names was Michael, and the
other a name quite impossible to remember or repeat in our
Western civilization, had, however, as I have said, made himself
quite happy while he was in a mountain hermitage in the society
of wild animals.  And now that his luck had lifted him above all
the mountains in the society of a wild physicist, he made himself
happy still.

"I have no intention, my good Michael," said Professor Lucifer,
"of endeavouring to convert you by argument.  The imbecility of
your traditions can be quite finally exhibited to anybody with
mere ordinary knowledge of the world, the same kind of knowledge
which teaches us not to sit in draughts or not to encourage
friendliness in impecunious people.  It is folly to talk of this
or that demonstrating the rationalist philosophy.  Everything
demonstrates it.  Rubbing shoulders with men of all kinds----"

"You will forgive me," said the monk, meekly from under loads of
white beard, "but I fear I do not understand; was it in order
that I might rub my shoulder against men of all kinds that you
put me inside this thing?"

"An entertaining retort, in the narrow and deductive manner of
the Middle Ages," replied the Professor, calmly, "but even upon
your own basis I will illustrate my point.  We are up in the sky.
In your religion and all the religions, as far as I know (and I
know everything), the sky is made the symbol of everything that
is sacred and merciful.  Well, now you are in the sky, you know
better.  Phrase it how you like, twist it how you like, you know
that you know better.  You know what are a man's real feelings
about the heavens, when he finds himself alone in the heavens,
surrounded by the heavens.  You know the truth, and the truth is
this.  The heavens are evil, the sky is evil, the stars are evil.
This mere space, this mere quantity, terrifies a man more than
tigers or the terrible plague.  You know that since our science
has spoken, the bottom has fallen out of the Universe.  Now,
heaven is the hopeless thing, more hopeless than any hell.  Now,
if there be any comfort for all your miserable progeny of morbid
apes, it must be in the earth, underneath you, under the roots of
the grass, in the place where hell was of old.  The fiery crypts,
the lurid cellars of the underworld, to which you once condemned
the wicked, are hideous enough, but at least they are more homely
than the heaven in which we ride.  And the time will come when you
will all hide in them, to escape the horror of the stars."

"I hope you will excuse my interrupting you," said Michael, with
a slight cough, "but I have always noticed----"

"Go on, pray go on," said Professor Lucifer, radiantly, "I really
like to draw out your simple ideas."

"Well, the fact is," said the other, "that much as I admire your
rhetoric and the rhetoric of your school, from a purely verbal
point of view, such little study of you and your school in human
history as I have been enabled to make has led me to--er--rather
singular conclusion, which I find great difficulty in expressing,
especially in a foreign language."

"Come, come," said the Professor, encouragingly, "I'll help you
out. How did my view strike you?"

"Well, the truth is, I know I don't express it properly, but
somehow it seemed to me that you always convey ideas of that kind
with most eloquence, when--er--when----"

"Oh! get on," cried Lucifer, boisterously.

"Well, in point of fact when your flying ship is just going to
run into something.  I thought you wouldn't mind my mentioning it,
but it's running into something now."

Lucifer exploded with an oath and leapt erect, leaning hard upon
the handle that acted as a helm to the vessel.  For the last ten
minutes they had been shooting downwards into great cracks and
caverns of cloud.  Now, through a sort of purple haze, could be
seen comparatively near to them what seemed to be the upper part
of a huge, dark orb or sphere, islanded in a sea of cloud.  The
Professor's eyes were blazing like a maniac's.

"It is a new world," he cried, with a dreadful mirth.  "It is a
new planet and it shall bear my name.  This star and not that
other vulgar one shall be 'Lucifer, sun of the morning.'  Here we
will have no chartered lunacies, here we will have no gods.  Here
man shall be as innocent as the daisies, as innocent and as
cruel--here the intellect----"

"There seems," said Michael, timidly, "to be something sticking
up in the middle of it."

"So there is," said the Professor, leaning over the side of the
ship, his spectacles shining with intellectual excitement.  "What
can it be? It might of course be merely a----"

Then a shriek indescribable broke out of him of a sudden, and he
flung up his arms like a lost spirit.  The monk took the helm in a
tired way; he did not seem much astonished for he came from an
ignorant part of the world in which it is not uncommon for lost
spirits to shriek when they see the curious shape which the
Professor had just seen on the top of the mysterious ball, but he
took the helm only just in time, and by driving it hard to the
left he prevented the flying ship from smashing into St. Paul's
Cathedral.

A plain of sad-coloured cloud lay along the level of the top of
the Cathedral dome, so that the ball and the cross looked like a
buoy riding on a leaden sea.  As the flying ship swept towards it,
this plain of cloud looked as dry and definite and rocky as any
grey desert.  Hence it gave to the mind and body a sharp and
unearthly sensation when the ship cut and sank into the cloud as
into any common mist, a thing without resistance.  There was, as
it were, a deadly shock in the fact that there was no shock.  It
was as if they had cloven into ancient cliffs like so much
butter.  But sensations awaited them which were much stranger than
those of sinking through the solid earth.  For a moment their eyes
and nostrils were stopped with darkness and opaque cloud; then
the darkness warmed into a kind of brown fog.  And far, far below
them the brown fog fell until it warmed into fire.  Through the
dense London atmosphere they could see below them the flaming
London lights; lights which lay beneath them in squares and
oblongs of fire.  The fog and fire were mixed in a passionate
vapour; you might say that the fog was drowning the flames; or
you might say that the flames had set the fog on fire.  Beside the
ship and beneath it (for it swung just under the ball), the
immeasurable dome itself shot out and down into the dark like a
combination of voiceless cataracts.  Or it was like some cyclopean
sea-beast sitting above London and letting down its tentacles
bewilderingly on every side, a monstrosity in that starless
heaven.  For the clouds that belonged to London had closed over
the heads of the voyagers sealing up the entrance of the upper
air.  They had broken through a roof and come into a temple of
twilight.

They were so near to the ball that Lucifer leaned his hand
against it, holding the vessel away, as men push a boat off from
a bank.  Above it the cross already draped in the dark mists of
the borderland was shadowy and more awful in shape and size.

Professor Lucifer slapped his hand twice upon the surface of the
great orb as if he were caressing some enormous animal.  "This is
the fellow," he said, "this is the one for my money."

"May I with all respect inquire," asked the old monk, "what on
earth you are talking about?"

"Why this," cried Lucifer, smiting the ball again, "here is the
only symbol, my boy.  So fat.  So satisfied. Not like that scraggy
individual, stretching his arms in stark weariness."  And he
pointed up to the cross, his face dark with a grin.  "I was
telling you just now, Michael, that I can prove the best part of
the rationalist case and the Christian humbug from any symbol you
liked to give me, from any instance I came across.  Here is an
instance with a vengeance.  What could possibly express your
philosophy and my philosophy better than the shape of that cross
and the shape of this ball?  This globe is reasonable; that cross
is unreasonable.  It is a four-legged animal, with one leg longer
than the others.  The globe is inevitable.  The cross is arbitrary.
Above all the globe is at unity with itself; the cross is
primarily and above all things at enmity with itself.  The cross
is the conflict of two hostile lines, of irreconcilable
direction.  That silent thing up there is essentially a collision,
a crash, a struggle in stone.  Pah! that sacred symbol of yours
has actually given its name to a description of desperation and
muddle.  When we speak of men at once ignorant of each other and
frustrated by each other, we say they are at cross-purposes.  Away
with the thing!  The very shape of it is a contradiction in
terms."

"What you say is perfectly true," said Michael, with serenity.
"But we like contradictions in terms.  Man is a contradiction in
terms; he is a beast whose superiority to other beasts consists
in having fallen.  That cross is, as you say, an eternal
collision; so am I.  That is a struggle in stone. Every form of
life is a struggle in flesh.  The shape of the cross is
irrational, just as the shape of the human animal is irrational.
You say the cross is a quadruped with one limb longer than the
rest.  I say man is a quadruped who only uses two of his legs."

The Professor frowned thoughtfully for an instant, and said: "Of
course everything is relative, and I would not deny that the
element of struggle and self-contradiction, represented by that
cross, has a necessary place at a certain evolutionary stage.
But surely the cross is the lower development and the sphere the
higher.  After all it is easy enough to see what is really wrong
with Wren's architectural arrangement."

"And what is that, pray?" inquired Michael, meekly.

"The cross is on top of the ball," said Professor Lucifer,
simply.  "That is surely wrong.  The ball should be on top of the
cross.  The cross is a mere barbaric prop; the ball is perfection.
The cross at its best is but the bitter tree of man's history;
the ball is the rounded, the ripe and final fruit.  And the fruit
should be at the top of the tree, not at the bottom of it."

"Oh!" said the monk, a wrinkle coming into his forehead, "so you
think that in a rationalistic scheme of symbolism the ball should
be on top of the cross?"

"It sums up my whole allegory," said the professor.

"Well, that is really very interesting," resumed Michael slowly,
"because I think in that case you would see a most singular
effect, an effect that has generally been achieved by all those
able and powerful systems which rationalism, or the religion of
the ball, has produced to lead or teach mankind.  You would see, I
think, that thing happen which is always the ultimate embodiment
and logical outcome of your logical scheme."

"What are you talking about?" asked Lucifer. "What would happen?"

"I mean it would fall down," said the monk, looking wistfully
into the void.

Lucifer made an angry movement and opened his mouth to speak, but
Michael, with all his air of deliberation, was proceeding before
he could bring out a word.

"I once knew a man like you, Lucifer," he said, with a maddening
monotony and slowness of articulation.  "He took this----"

"There is no man like me," cried Lucifer, with a violence that
shook the ship.

"As I was observing," continued Michael, "this man also took the
view that the symbol of Christianity was a symbol of savagery and
all unreason.  His history is rather amusing.  It is also a perfect
allegory of what happens to rationalists like yourself.  He began,
of course, by refusing to allow a crucifix in his house, or round
his wife's neck, or even in a picture.  He said, as you say, that
it was an arbitrary and fantastic shape, that it was a
monstrosity, loved because it was paradoxical.  Then he began to
grow fiercer and more eccentric; he would batter the crosses by
the roadside; for he lived in a Roman Catholic country.  Finally
in a height of frenzy he climbed the steeple of the Parish Church
and tore down the cross, waving it in the air, and uttering wild
soliloquies up there under the stars.  Then one still summer
evening as he was wending his way homewards, along a lane, the
devil of his madness came upon him with a violence and
transfiguration which changes the world.  He was standing smoking,
for a moment, in the front of an interminable line of palings,
when his eyes were opened.  Not a light shifted, not a leaf
stirred, but he saw as if by a sudden change in the eyesight that
this paling was an army of innumerable crosses linked together
over hill and dale.  And he whirled up his heavy stick and went at
it as if at an army.  Mile after mile along his homeward path he
broke it down and tore it up.  For he hated the cross and every
paling is a wall of crosses.  When he returned to his house he was
a literal madman.  He sat upon a chair and then started up from it
for the cross-bars of the carpentry repeated the intolerable
image.  He flung himself upon a bed only to remember that this,
too, like all workmanlike things, was constructed on the accursed
plan.  He broke his furniture because it was made of crosses.  He
burnt his house because it was made of crosses.  He was found in
the river."

Lucifer was looking at him with a bitten lip.

"Is that story really true?" he asked.

"Oh, no," said Michael, airily.  "It is a parable.  It is a parable
of you and all your rationalists.  You begin by breaking up the
Cross; but you end by breaking up the habitable world.  We leave
you saying that nobody ought to join the Church against his will.
When we meet you again you are saying that no one has any will to
join it with.  We leave you saying that there is no such place as
Eden.  We find you saying that there is no such place as Ireland.
You start by hating the irrational and you come to hate
everything, for everything is irrational and so----"

Lucifer leapt upon him with a cry like a wild beast's.  "Ah," he
screamed, "to every man his madness.  You are mad on the cross.
Let it save you."

And with a herculean energy he forced the monk backwards out of
the reeling car on to the upper part of the stone ball.  Michael,
with as abrupt an agility, caught one of the beams of the cross
and saved himself from falling.  At the same instant Lucifer drove
down a lever and the ship shot up with him in it alone.

"Ha! ha!" he yelled, "what sort of a support do you find it, old
fellow?"

"For practical purposes of support," replied Michael grimly, "it
is at any rate a great deal better than the ball.  May I ask if
you are going to leave me here?"

"Yes, yes. I mount! I mount!" cried the professor in ungovernable
excitement.  "_Altiora peto_.  My path is upward."

"How often have you told me, Professor, that there is really no
up or down in space?" said the monk.  "I shall mount up as much as
you will."

"Indeed," said Lucifer, leering over the side of the flying ship.
"May I ask what you are going to do?"

The monk pointed downward at Ludgate Hill.  "I am going," he said,
"to climb up into a star."

Those who look at the matter most superficially regard paradox as
something which belongs to jesting and light journalism.  Paradox
of this kind is to be found in the saying of the dandy, in the
decadent comedy, "Life is much too important to be taken
seriously."  Those who look at the matter a little more deeply or
delicately see that paradox is a thing which especially belongs
to all religions.  Paradox of this kind is to be found in such a
saying as "The meek shall inherit the earth."  But those who see
and feel the fundamental fact of the matter know that paradox is
a thing which belongs not to religion only, but to all vivid and
violent practical crises of human living.  This kind of paradox
may be clearly perceived by anybody who happens to be hanging in
mid-space, clinging to one arm of the Cross of St. Paul's.

Father Michael in spite of his years, and in spite of his
asceticism (or because of it, for all I know), was a very healthy
and happy old gentleman.  And as he swung on a bar above the
sickening emptiness of air, he realized, with that sort of dead
detachment which belongs to the brains of those in peril, the
deathless and hopeless contradiction which is involved in the
mere idea of courage.  He was a happy and healthy old gentleman
and therefore he was quite careless about it.  And he felt as
every man feels in the taut moment of such terror that his chief
danger was terror itself; his only possible strength would be a
coolness amounting to carelessness, a carelessness amounting
almost to a suicidal swagger.  His one wild chance of coming out
safely would be in not too desperately desiring to be safe.  There
might be footholds down that awful facade, if only he could not
care whether they were footholds or no.  If he were foolhardy he
might escape; if he were wise he would stop where he was till he
dropped from the cross like a stone.  And this antinomy kept on
repeating itself in his mind, a contradiction as large and
staring as the immense contradiction of the Cross; he remembered
having often heard the words, "Whosoever shall lose his life the
same shall save it."  He remembered with a sort of strange pity
that this had always been made to mean that whoever lost his
physical life should save his spiritual life.  Now he knew the
truth that is known to all fighters, and hunters, and climbers of
cliffs.  He knew that even his animal life could only be saved by
a considerable readiness to lose it.

Some will think it improbable that a human soul swinging
desperately in mid-air should think about philosophical
inconsistencies.  But such extreme states are dangerous things to
dogmatize about.  Frequently they produce a certain useless and
joyless activity of the mere intellect, thought not only divorced
from hope but even from desire.  And if it is impossible to
dogmatize about such states, it is still more impossible to
describe them.  To this spasm of sanity and clarity in Michael's
mind succeeded a spasm of the elemental terror; the terror of the
animal in us which regards the whole universe as its enemy;
which, when it is victorious, has no pity, and so, when it is
defeated has no imaginable hope.  Of that ten minutes of terror it
is not possible to speak in human words.  But then again in that
damnable darkness there began to grow a strange dawn as of grey
and pale silver.  And of this ultimate resignation or certainty it
is even less possible to write; it is something stranger than
hell itself; it is perhaps the last of the secrets of God.  At the
highest crisis of some incurable anguish there will suddenly fall
upon the man the stillness of an insane contentment.  It is not
hope, for hope is broken and romantic and concerned with the
future; this is complete and of the present.  It is not faith, for
faith by its very nature is fierce, and as it were at once
doubtful and defiant; but this is simply a satisfaction.  It is
not knowledge, for the intellect seems to have no particular part
in it.  Nor is it (as the modern idiots would certainly say it is)
a mere numbness or negative paralysis of the powers of grief.  It
is not negative in the least; it is as positive as good news.  In
some sense, indeed, it is good news.  It seems almost as if there
were some equality among things, some balance in all possible
contingencies which we are not permitted to know lest we should
learn indifference to good and evil, but which is sometimes shown
to us for an instant as a last aid in our last agony.

Michael certainly could not have given any sort of rational
account of this vast unmeaning satisfaction which soaked through
him and filled him to the brim.  He felt with a sort of
half-witted lucidity that the cross was there, and the ball was
there, and the dome was there, that he was going to climb down
from them, and that he did not mind in the least whether he was
killed or not.  This mysterious mood lasted long enough to start
him on his dreadful descent and to force him to continue it.  But
six times before he reached the highest of the outer galleries
terror had returned on him like a flying storm of darkness and
thunder.  By the time he had reached that place of safety he
almost felt (as in some impossible fit of drunkenness) that he
had two heads; one was calm, careless, and efficient; the other
saw the danger like a deadly map, was wise, careful, and useless.
He had fancied that he would have to let himself vertically down
the face of the whole building.  When he dropped into the upper
gallery he still felt as far from the terrestrial globe as if he
had only dropped from the sun to the moon.  He paused a little,
panting in the gallery under the ball, and idly kicked his heels,
moving a few yards along it.  And as he did so a thunderbolt
struck his soul.  A man, a heavy, ordinary man, with a composed
indifferent face, and a prosaic sort of uniform, with a row of
buttons, blocked his way.  Michael had no mind to wonder whether
this solid astonished man, with the brown moustache and the
nickel buttons, had also come on a flying ship.  He merely let his
mind float in an endless felicity about the man.  He thought how
nice it would be if he had to live up in that gallery with that
one man for ever.  He thought how he would luxuriate in the
nameless shades of this man's soul and then hear with an endless
excitement about the nameless shades of the souls of all his
aunts and uncles.  A moment before he had been dying alone.  Now
he was living in the same world with a man; an inexhaustible
ecstasy.  In the gallery below the ball Father Michael had found
that man who is the noblest and most divine and most lovable of
all men, better than all the saints, greater than all the
heroes--man Friday.

In the confused colour and music of his new paradise, Michael
heard only in a faint and distant fashion some remarks that this
beautiful solid man seemed to be making to him; remarks about
something or other being after hours and against orders.  He also
seemed to be asking how Michael "got up" there.  This beautiful
man evidently felt as Michael did that the earth was a star and
was set in heaven.

At length Michael sated himself with the mere sensual music of
the voice of the man in buttons.  He began to listen to what he
said, and even to make some attempt at answering a question which
appeared to have been put several times and was now put with some
excess of emphasis.  Michael realized that the image of God in
nickel buttons was asking him how he had come there.  He said that
he had come in Lucifer's ship.  On his giving this answer the
demeanour of the image of God underwent a remarkable change.  From
addressing Michael gruffly, as if he were a malefactor, he began
suddenly to speak to him with a sort of eager and feverish
amiability as if he were a child.  He seemed particularly anxious
to coax him away from the balustrade.  He led him by the arm
towards a door leading into the building itself, soothing him all
the time.  He gave what even Michael (slight as was his knowledge
of the world) felt to be an improbable account of the sumptuous
pleasures and varied advantages awaiting him downstairs.  Michael
followed him, however, if only out of politeness, down an
apparently interminable spiral of staircase.  At one point a door
opened.  Michael stepped through it, and the unaccountable man in
buttons leapt after him and pinioned him where he stood.  But he
only wished to stand; to stand and stare.  He had stepped as it
were into another infinity, out under the dome of another heaven.
But this was a dome of heaven made by man.  The gold and green and
crimson of its sunset were not in the shapeless clouds but in
shapes of cherubim and seraphim, awful human shapes with a
passionate plumage.  Its stars were not above but far below, like
fallen stars still in unbroken constellations; the dome itself
was full of darkness.  And far below, lower even than the lights,
could be seen creeping or motionless, great black masses of men.
The tongue of a terrible organ seemed to shake the very air in
the whole void; and through it there came up to Michael the sound
of a tongue more terrible; the dreadful everlasting voice of man,
calling to his gods from the beginning to the end of the world.
Michael felt almost as if he were a god, and all the voices were
hurled at him.

"No, the pretty things aren't here," said the demi-god in
buttons, caressingly.  "The pretty things are downstairs.  You
come along with me.  There's something that will surprise you
downstairs; something you want very much to see."

Evidently the man in buttons did not feel like a god, so Michael
made no attempt to explain his feelings to him, but followed him
meekly enough down the trail of the serpentine staircase.  He had
no notion where or at what level he was.  He was still full of the
cold splendour of space, and of what a French writer has
brilliantly named the "vertigo of the infinite," when another
door opened, and with a shock indescribable he found himself on
the familiar level, in a street full of faces, with the houses
and even the lamp-posts above his head.  He felt suddenly happy
and suddenly indescribably small.  He fancied he had been changed
into a child again; his eyes sought the pavement seriously as
children's do, as if it were a thing with which something
satisfactory could be done.  He felt the full warmth of that
pleasure from which the proud shut themselves out; the pleasure
which not only goes with humiliation, but which almost is
humiliation.  Men who have escaped death by a hair have it, and
men whose love is returned by a woman unexpectedly, and men whose
sins are forgiven them.  Everything his eye fell on it feasted on,
not aesthetically, but with a plain, jolly appetite as of a boy
eating buns.  He relished the squareness of the houses; he liked
their clean angles as if he had just cut them with a knife.  The
lit squares of the shop windows excited him as the young are
excited by the lit stage of some promising pantomime.  He
happened to see in one shop which projected with a bulging
bravery on to the pavement some square tins of potted meat, and
it seemed like a hint of a hundred hilarious high teas in a
hundred streets of the world.  He was, perhaps, the happiest of
all the children of men.  For in that unendurable instant when he
hung, half slipping, to the ball of St. Paul's, the whole
universe had been destroyed and re-created.

Suddenly through all the din of the dark streets came a crash of
glass.  With that mysterious suddenness of the Cockney mob, a rush
was made in the right direction, a dingy office, next to the shop
of the potted meat.  The pane of glass was lying in splinters
about the pavement.  And the police already had their hands on a
very tall young man, with dark, lank hair and dark, dazed eyes,
with a grey plaid over his shoulder, who had just smashed the
shop window with a single blow of his stick.

"I'd do it again," said the young man, with a furious white face.
"Anybody would have done it.  Did you see what it said?  I swear
I'd do it again."  Then his eyes encountered the monkish habit of
Michael, and he pulled off his grey tam-o'-shanter with the
gesture of a Catholic.

"Father, did you see what they said?" he cried, trembling.  "Did
you see what they dared to say?  I didn't understand it at first.
I read it half through before I broke the window."

Michael felt he knew not how.  The whole peace of the world was
pent up painfully in his heart.  The new and childlike world which
he had seen so suddenly, men had not seen at all.  Here they were
still at their old bewildering, pardonable, useless quarrels,
with so much to be said on both sides, and so little that need be
said at all.  A fierce inspiration fell on him suddenly; he would
strike them where they stood with the love of God.  They should
not move till they saw their own sweet and startling existence.
They should not go from that place till they went home embracing
like brothers and shouting like men delivered.  From the Cross
from which he had fallen fell the shadow of its fantastic mercy;
and the first three words he spoke in a voice like a silver
trumpet, held men as still as stones.  Perhaps if he had spoken
there for an hour in his illumination he might have founded a
religion on Ludgate Hill.  But the heavy hand of his guide fell
suddenly on his shoulder.

"This poor fellow is dotty," he said good-humouredly to the
crowd.  "I found him wandering in the Cathedral.  Says he came in
a flying ship.  Is there a constable to spare to take care of him?"

There was a constable to spare.  Two other constables attended to
the tall young man in grey; a fourth concerned himself with the
owner of the shop, who showed some tendency to be turbulent.  They
took the tall young man away to a magistrate, whither we shall
follow him in an ensuing chapter.  And they took the happiest man
in the world away to an asylum.



II. THE RELIGION OF THE STIPENDIARY MAGISTRATE

The editorial office of _The Atheist_ had for some years past
become less and less prominently interesting as a feature of
Ludgate Hill.  The paper was unsuited to the atmosphere.  It showed
an interest in the Bible unknown in the district, and a knowledge
of that volume to which nobody else on Ludgate Hill could make
any conspicuous claim.  It was in vain that the editor of _The
Atheist_ filled his front window with fierce and final demands as
to what Noah in the Ark did with the neck of the giraffe.  It was
in vain that he asked violently, as for the last time, how the
statement "God is Spirit" could be reconciled with the statement
"The earth is His footstool."  It was in vain that he cried with
an accusing energy that the Bishop of London was paid L12,000 a
year for pretending to believe that the whale swallowed Jonah.  It
was in vain that he hung in conspicuous places the most thrilling
scientific calculations about the width of the throat of a whale.
Was it nothing to them all they that passed by?  Did his sudden
and splendid and truly sincere indignation never stir any of the
people pouring down Ludgate Hill?  Never.  The little man who
edited _The Atheist_ would rush from his shop on starlit evenings
and shake his fist at St. Paul's in the passion of his holy war
upon the holy place.  He might have spared his emotion.  The cross
at the top of St. Paul's and _The Atheist_ shop at the foot of it
were alike remote from the world.  The shop and the Cross were
equally uplifted and alone in the empty heavens.

To the little man who edited _The Atheist_, a fiery little
Scotchman, with fiery, red hair and beard, going by the name of
Turnbull, all this decline in public importance seemed not so
much sad or even mad, but merely bewildering and unaccountable.
He had said the worst thing that could be said; and it seemed
accepted and ignored like the ordinary second best of the
politicians.  Every day his blasphemies looked more glaring, and
every day the dust lay thicker upon them.  It made him feel as if
he were moving in a world of idiots.  He seemed among a race of
men who smiled when told of their own death, or looked vacantly
at the Day of Judgement.  Year after year went by, and year after
year the death of God in a shop in Ludgate became a less and less
important occurrence.  All the forward men of his age discouraged
Turnbull.  The socialists said he was cursing priests when he
should be cursing capitalists.  The artists said that the soul was
most spiritual, not when freed from religion, but when freed from
morality.  Year after year went by, and at least a man came by who
treated Mr. Turnbull's secularist shop with a real respect and
seriousness.  He was a young man in a grey plaid, and he smashed
the window.

He was a young man, born in the Bay of Arisaig, opposite Rum and
the Isle of Skye.  His high, hawklike features and snaky black
hair bore the mark of that unknown historic thing which is
crudely called Celtic, but which is probably far older than the
Celts, whoever they were.  He was in name and stock a Highlander
of the Macdonalds; but his family took, as was common in such
cases, the name of a subordinate sept as a surname, and for all
the purposes which could be answered in London, he called himself
Evan MacIan.  He had been brought up in some loneliness and
seclusion as a strict Roman Catholic, in the midst of that little
wedge of Roman Catholics which is driven into the Western
Highlands.  And he had found his way as far as Fleet Street,
seeking some half-promised employment, without having properly
realized that there were in the world any people who were not
Roman Catholics.  He had uncovered himself for a few moments
before the statue of Queen Anne, in front of St. Paul's
Cathedral, under the firm impression that it was a figure of the
Virgin Mary.  He was somewhat surprised at the lack of deference
shown to the figure by the people bustling by.  He did not
understand that their one essential historical principle, the one
law truly graven on their hearts, was the great and comforting
statement that Queen Anne is dead.  This faith was as fundamental
as his faith, that Our Lady was alive.  Any persons he had talked
to since he had touched the fringe of our fashion or civilization
had been by a coincidence, sympathetic or hypocritical.  Or if
they had spoken some established blasphemies, he had been unable
to understand them merely owing to the preoccupied satisfaction
of his mind.

On that fantastic fringe of the Gaelic land where he walked as a
boy, the cliffs were as fantastic as the clouds.  Heaven seemed to
humble itself and come closer to the earth.  The common paths of
his little village began to climb quite suddenly and seemed
resolved to go to heaven.  The sky seemed to fall down towards the
hills; the hills took hold upon the sky.  In the sumptuous sunset
of gold and purple and peacock green cloudlets and islets were
the same.  Evan lived like a man walking on a borderland, the
borderland between this world and another.  Like so many men and
nations who grow up with nature and the common things, he
understood the supernatural before he understood the natural.  He
had looked at dim angels standing knee-deep in the grass before
he had looked at the grass.  He knew that Our Lady's robes were
blue before he knew the wild roses round her feet were red.  The
deeper his memory plunged into the dark house of childhood the
nearer and nearer he came to the things that cannot be named.
All through his life he thought of the daylight world as a sort
of divine debris, the broken remainder of his first vision.  The
skies and mountains were the splendid off-scourings of another
place.  The stars were lost jewels of the Queen.  Our Lady had
gone and left the stars by accident.

His private tradition was equally wild and unworldly.  His
great-grandfather had been cut down at Culloden, certain in his
last instant that God would restore the King.  His grandfather,
then a boy of ten, had taken the terrible claymore from the hand
of the dead and hung it up in his house, burnishing it and
sharpening it for sixty years, to be ready for the next
rebellion.  His father, the youngest son and the last left alive,
had refused to attend on Queen Victoria in Scotland.  And Evan
himself had been of one piece with his progenitors; and was not
dead with them, but alive in the twentieth century.  He was not
in the least the pathetic Jacobite of whom we read, left behind
by a final advance of all things.  He was, in his own fancy, a
conspirator, fierce and up to date.  In the long, dark afternoons
of the Highland winter, he plotted and fumed in the dark.  He
drew plans of the capture of London on the desolate sand of
Arisaig.

When he came up to capture London, it was not with an army of
white cockades, but with a stick and a satchel.  London overawed
him a little, not because he thought it grand or even terrible,
but because it bewildered him; it was not the Golden City or even
hell; it was Limbo.  He had one shock of sentiment, when he turned
that wonderful corner of Fleet Street and saw St. Paul's sitting
in the sky.

"Ah," he said, after a long pause, "that sort of thing was built
under the Stuarts!"  Then with a sour grin he asked himself what
was the corresponding monument of the Brunswicks and the
Protestant Constitution.  After some warning, he selected a
sky-sign of some pill.

Half an hour afterwards his emotions left him with an emptied
mind on the same spot.  And it was in a mood of mere idle
investigation that he happened to come to a standstill opposite
the office of _The Atheist_.  He did not see the word "atheist",
or if he did, it is quite possible that he did not know the
meaning of the word.  Even as it was, the document would not have
shocked even the innocent Highlander, but for the troublesome and
quite unforeseen fact that the innocent Highlander read it
stolidly to the end; a thing unknown among the most enthusiastic
subscribers to the paper, and calculated in any case to create a
new situation.

With a smart journalistic instinct characteristic of all his
school, the editor of _The Atheist_ had put first in his paper
and most prominently in his window an article called "The
Mesopotamian Mythology and its Effects on Syriac Folk Lore."  Mr.
Evan MacIan began to read this quite idly, as he would have read
a public statement beginning with a young girl dying in Brighton
and ending with Bile Beans.  He received the very considerable
amount of information accumulated by the author with that tired
clearness of the mind which children have on heavy summer
afternoons--that tired clearness which leads them to go on asking
questions long after they have lost interest in the subject and
are as bored as their nurse.  The streets were full of people and
empty of adventures.  He might as well know about the gods of
Mesopotamia as not; so he flattened his long, lean face against
the dim bleak pane of the window and read all there was to read
about Mesopotamian gods.  He read how the Mesopotamians had a god
named Sho (sometimes pronounced Ji), and that he was described as
being very powerful, a striking similarity to some expressions
about Jahveh, who is also described as having power.  Evan had
never heard of Jahveh in his life, and imagining him to be some
other Mesopotamian idol, read on with a dull curiosity.  He learnt
that the name Sho, under its third form of Psa, occurs in an
early legend which describes how the deity, after the manner of
Jupiter on so many occasions, seduced a Virgin and begat a hero.
This hero, whose name is not essential to our existence, was, it
was said, the chief hero and Saviour of the Mesopotamian ethical
scheme.  Then followed a paragraph giving other examples of such
heroes and Saviours being born of some profligate intercourse
between God and mortal.  Then followed a paragraph--but Evan did
not understand it.  He read it again and then again.  Then he did
understand it.  The glass fell in ringing fragments on to the
pavement, and Evan sprang over the barrier into the shop,
brandishing his stick.

"What is this?" cried little Mr. Turnbull, starting up with hair
aflame.  "How dare you break my window?"

"Because it was the quickest cut to you," cried Evan, stamping.
"Stand up and fight, you crapulous coward.  You dirty lunatic,
stand up, will you? Have you any weapons here?"

"Are you mad?" asked Turnbull, glaring.

"Are you?" cried Evan.  "Can you be anything else when you plaster
your own house with that God-defying filth?  Stand up and fight, I
say."

A great light like dawn came into Mr. Turnbull's face.  Behind his
red hair and beard he turned deadly pale with pleasure.  Here,
after twenty lone years of useless toil, he had his reward.
Someone was angry with the paper.  He bounded to his feet like a
boy; he saw a new youth opening before him.  And as not
unfrequently happens to middle-aged gentlemen when they see a new
youth opening before them, he found himself in the presence of
the police.

The policemen, after some ponderous questionings, collared both
the two enthusiasts.  They were more respectful, however, to the
young man who had smashed the window, than to the miscreant who
had had his window smashed.  There was an air of refined mystery
about Evan MacIan, which did not exist in the irate little
shopkeeper, an air of refined mystery which appealed to the
policemen, for policemen, like most other English types, are at
once snobs and poets.  MacIan might possibly be a gentleman, they
felt; the editor manifestly was not.  And the editor's fine
rational republican appeals to his respect for law, and his
ardour to be tried by his fellow citizens, seemed to the police
quite as much gibberish as Evan's mysticism could have done.  The
police were not used to hearing principles, even the principles
of their own existence.

The police magistrate, before whom they were hurried and tried,
was a Mr. Cumberland Vane, a cheerful, middle-aged gentleman,
honourably celebrated for the lightness of his sentences and the
lightness of his conversation.  He occasionally worked himself up
into a sort of theoretic rage about certain particular offenders,
such as the men who took pokers to their wives, talked in a
loose, sentimental way about the desirability of flogging them,
and was hopelessly bewildered by the fact that the wives seemed
even more angry with him than with their husbands.  He was a tall,
spruce man, with a twist of black moustache and incomparable
morning dress.  He looked like a gentleman, and yet, somehow, like
a stage gentleman.

He had often treated serious crimes against mere order or
property with a humane flippancy.  Hence, about the mere breaking
of an editor's window, he was almost uproarious.

"Come, Mr. MacIan, come," he said, leaning back in his chair, "do
you generally enter you friends' houses by walking through the
glass?"  (Laughter.)

"He is not my friend," said Evan, with the stolidity of a dull
child.

"Not your friend, eh?" said the magistrate, sparkling.  "Is he
your brother-in-law?"  (Loud and prolonged laughter.)

"He is my enemy," said Evan, simply; "he is the enemy of God."

Mr. Vane shifted sharply in his seat, dropping the eye-glass out
of his eye in a momentary and not unmanly embarrassment.

"You mustn't talk like that here," he said, roughly, and in a
kind of hurry, "that has nothing to do with us."

Evan opened his great, blue eyes; "God," he began.

"Be quiet," said the magistrate, angrily, "it is most undesirable
that things of that sort should be spoken about--a--in public,
and in an ordinary Court of Justice.  Religion is--a--too personal
a matter to be mentioned in such a place."

"Is it?" answered the Highlander, "then what did those policemen
swear by just now?"

"That is no parallel," answered Vane, rather irritably; "of
course there is a form of oath--to be taken reverently--
reverently, and there's an end of it.  But to talk in a public
place about one's most sacred and private sentiments--well, I
call it bad taste.  (Slight applause.)  I call it irreverent.
I call it irreverent, and I'm not specially orthodox either."

"I see you are not," said Evan, "but I am."

"We are wondering from the point," said the police magistrate,
pulling himself together.

"May I ask why you smashed this worthy citizen's window?"

Evan turned a little pale at the mere memory, but he answered
with the same cold and deadly literalism that he showed
throughout.

"Because he blasphemed Our Lady."

"I tell you once and for all," cried Mr. Cumberland Vane, rapping
his knuckles angrily on the table, "I tell you, once and for all,
my man, that I will not have you turning on any religious rant or
cant here.  Don't imagine that it will impress me.  The most
religious people are not those who talk about it.  (Applause.)
You answer the questions and do nothing else."

"I did nothing else," said Evan, with a slight smile.

"Eh," cried Vane, glaring through his eye-glass.

"You asked me why I broke his window," said MacIan, with a face
of wood.  "I answered, 'Because he blasphemed Our Lady.'  I had
no other reason.  So I have no other answer."  Vane continued to
gaze at him with a sternness not habitual to him.

"You are not going the right way to work, Sir," he said, with
severity.  "You are not going the right way to work to--a--have
your case treated with special consideration.  If you had simply
expressed regret for what you had done, I should have been
strongly inclined to dismiss the matter as an outbreak of temper.
Even now, if you say that you are sorry I shall only----"

"But I am not in the least sorry," said Evan, "I am very
pleased."

"I really believe you are insane," said the stipendiary,
indignantly, for he had really been doing his best as a
good-natured man, to compose the dispute.  "What conceivable right
have you to break other people's windows because their opinions
do not agree with yours?  This man only gave expression to his
sincere belief."

"So did I," said the Highlander.

"And who are you?" exploded Vane.  "Are your views necessarily the
right ones?  Are you necessarily in possession of the truth?"

"Yes," said MacIan.

The magistrate broke into a contemptuous laugh.

"Oh, you want a nurse to look after you," he said. "You must pay
L10."

Evan MacIan plunged his hands into his loose grey garment and
drew out a queer looking leather purse.  It contained exactly
twelve sovereigns.  He paid down the ten, coin by coin, in
silence, and equally silently returned the remaining two to the
receptacle.  Then he said, "May I say a word, your worship?"

Cumberland Vane seemed half hypnotized with the silence and
automatic movements of the stranger; he made a movement with his
head which might have been either "yes" or "no".  "I only wished
to say, your worship," said MacIan, putting back the purse in his
trouser pocket, "that smashing that shop window was, I confess, a
useless and rather irregular business.  It may be excused,
however, as a mere preliminary to further proceedings, a sort of
preface.  Wherever and whenever I meet that man," and he pointed
to the editor of _The Atheist_, "whether it be outside this door
in ten minutes from now, or twenty years hence in some distant
country, wherever and whenever I meet that man, I will fight him.
Do not be afraid. I will not rush at him like a bully, or bear
him down with any brute superiority.  I will fight him like a
gentleman; I will fight him as our fathers fought.  He shall
choose how, sword or pistol, horse or foot.  But if he refuses, I
will write his cowardice on every wall in the world.  If he had
said of my mother what he said of the Mother of God, there is not
a club of clean men in Europe that would deny my right to call
him out.  If he had said it of my wife, you English would
yourselves have pardoned me for beating him like a dog in the
market place.  Your worship, I have no mother; I have no wife.  I
have only that which the poor have equally with the rich; which
the lonely have equally with the man of many friends.  To me this
whole strange world is homely, because in the heart of it there
is a home; to me this cruel world is kindly, because higher than
the heavens there is something more human than humanity.  If a man
must not fight for this, may he fight for anything?  I would fight
for my friend, but if I lost my friend, I should still be there.
I would fight for my country, but if I lost my country, I should
still exist.  But if what that devil dreams were true, I should
not be--I should burst like a bubble and be gone. I could not
live in that imbecile universe.  Shall I not fight for my own
existence?"

The magistrate recovered his voice and his presence of mind.  The
first part of the speech, the bombastic and brutally practical
challenge, stunned him with surprise; but the rest of Evan's
remarks, branching off as they did into theoretic phrases, gave
his vague and very English mind (full of memories of the hedging
and compromise in English public speaking) an indistinct
sensation of relief, as if the man, though mad, were not so
dangerous as he had thought.  He went into a sort of weary
laughter.

"For Heaven's sake, man," he said, "don't talk so much. Let other
people have a chance (laughter).  I trust all that you said about
asking Mr. Turnbull to fight, may be regarded as rubbish.  In case
of accidents, however, I must bind you over to keep the peace."

"To keep the peace," repeated Evan, "with whom?"

"With Mr. Turnbull," said Vane.

"Certainly not," answered MacIan.  "What has he to do with peace?"

"Do you mean to say," began the magistrate, "that you refuse
to..."  The voice of Turnbull himself clove in for the first time.

"Might I suggest," he said, "That I, your worship, can settle to
some extent this absurd matter myself.  This rather wild gentleman
promises that he will not attack me with any ordinary assault--
and if he does, you may be sure the police shall hear of it.  But
he says he will not.  He says he will challenge me to a duel; and
I cannot say anything stronger about his mental state than to say
that I think that it is highly probable that he will.  (Laughter.)
But it takes two to make a duel, your worship (renewed laughter).
I do not in the least mind being described on every wall in the
world as the coward who would not fight a man in Fleet Street,
about whether the Virgin Mary had a parallel in Mesopotamian
mythology.  No, your worship.  You need not trouble to bind him
over to keep the peace.  I bind myself over to keep the peace,
and you may rest quite satisfied that there will be no duel with
me in it."

Mr. Cumberland Vane rolled about, laughing in a sort of relief.

"You're like a breath of April, sir," he cried. "You're ozone
after that fellow.  You're perfectly right.  Perhaps I have taken
the thing too seriously.  I should love to see him sending you
challenges and to see you smiling.  Well, well."

Evan went out of the Court of Justice free, but strangely shaken,
like a sick man.  Any punishment of suppression he would have felt
as natural; but the sudden juncture between the laughter of his
judge and the laughter of the man he had wronged, made him feel
suddenly small, or at least, defeated.  It was really true that
the whole modern world regarded his world as a bubble.  No cruelty
could have shown it, but their kindness showed it with a ghastly
clearness.  As he was brooding, he suddenly became conscious of a
small, stern figure, fronting him in silence.  Its eyes were grey
and awful, and its beard red.  It was Turnbull.

"Well, sir," said the editor of _The Atheist_, "where is the
fight to be?  Name the field, sir."

Evan stood thunderstruck.  He stammered out something, he knew not
what; he only guessed it by the answer of the other.

"Do I want to fight?  Do I want to fight?" cried the furious
Free-thinker.  "Why, you moonstruck scarecrow of superstition, do
you think your dirty saints are the only people who can die?
Haven't you hung atheists, and burned them, and boiled them, and
did they ever deny their faith?  Do you think we don't want to
fight?  Night and day I have prayed--I have longed--for an atheist
revolution--I have longed to see your blood and ours on the
streets.  Let it be yours or mine?"

"But you said..." began MacIan.

"I know," said Turnbull scornfully.  "And what did you say?  You
damned fool, you said things that might have got us locked up for
a year, and shadowed by the coppers for half a decade.  If you
wanted to fight, why did you tell that ass you wanted to?  I got
you out, to fight if you want to.  Now, fight if you dare."

"I swear to you, then," said MacIan, after a pause.  "I swear to
you that nothing shall come between us.  I swear to you that
nothing shall be in my heart or in my head till our swords clash
together.  I swear it by the God you have denied, by the Blessed
Lady you have blasphemed; I swear it by the seven swords in her
heart.  I swear it by the Holy Island where my fathers are, by the
honour of my mother, by the secret of my people, and by the
chalice of the Blood of God."

The atheist drew up his head.  "And I," he said, "give my word."



III. SOME OLD CURIOSITIES

The evening sky, a dome of solid gold, unflaked even by a single
sunset cloud, steeped the meanest sights of London in a strange
and mellow light.  It made a little greasy street of St. Martin's
Lane look as if it were paved with gold.  It made the pawnbroker's
half-way down it shine as if it were really that Mountain of
Piety that the French poetic instinct has named it; it made the
mean pseudo-French bookshop, next but one to it, a shop packed
with dreary indecency, show for a moment a kind of Parisian
colour.  And the shop that stood between the pawnshop and the shop
of dreary indecency, showed with quite a blaze of old world
beauty, for it was, by accident, a shop not unbeautiful in
itself.  The front window had a glimmer of bronze and blue steel,
lit, as by a few stars, by the sparks of what were alleged to be
jewels; for it was in brief, a shop of bric-a-brac and old
curiosities.  A row of half-burnished seventeenth-century swords
ran like an ornate railing along the front of the window; behind
was a darker glimmer of old oak and old armour; and higher up
hung the most extraordinary looking South Sea tools or utensils,
whether designed for killing enemies or merely for cooking them,
no mere white man could possibly conjecture.  But the romance of
the eye, which really on this rich evening, clung about the shop,
had its main source in the accident of two doors standing open,
the front door that opened on the street and a back door that
opened on an odd green square of garden, that the sun turned to a
square of gold.  There is nothing more beautiful than thus to look
as it were through the archway of a house; as if the open sky
were an interior chamber, and the sun a secret lamp of the place.

I have suggested that the sunset light made everything lovely.  To
say that it made the keeper of the curiosity shop lovely would be
a tribute to it perhaps too extreme.  It would easily have made
him beautiful if he had been merely squalid; if he had been a Jew
of the Fagin type.  But he was a Jew of another and much less
admirable type; a Jew with a very well-sounding name.  For though
there are no hard tests for separating the tares and the wheat of
any people, one rude but efficient guide is that the nice Jew is
called Moses Solomon, and the nasty Jew is called Thornton Percy.
The keeper of the curiosity shop was of the Thornton Percy branch
of the chosen people; he belonged to those Lost Ten Tribes whose
industrious object is to lose themselves.  He was a man still
young, but already corpulent, with sleek dark hair, heavy
handsome clothes, and a full, fat, permanent smile, which looked
at the first glance kindly, and at the second cowardly.  The name
over his shop was Henry Gordon, but two Scotchmen who were in his
shop that evening could come upon no trace of a Scotch accent.

These two Scotchmen in this shop were careful purchasers, but
free-handed payers.  One of them who seemed to be the principal
and the authority (whom, indeed, Mr. Henry Gordon fancied he had
seen somewhere before), was a small, sturdy fellow, with fine
grey eyes, a square red tie and a square red beard, that he
carried aggressively forward as if he defied anyone to pull it.
The other kept so much in the background in comparison that he
looked almost ghostly in his grey cloak or plaid, a tall, sallow,
silent young man.

The two Scotchmen were interested in seventeenth-century swords.
They were fastidious about them.  They had a whole armoury of
these weapons brought out and rolled clattering about the
counter, until they found two of precisely the same length.
Presumably they desired the exact symmetry for some decorative
trophy.  Even then they felt the points, poised the swords for
balance and bent them in a circle to see that they sprang
straight again; which, for decorative purposes, seems carrying
realism rather far.

"These will do," said the strange person with the red beard.
"And perhaps I had better pay for them at once. And as you are
the challenger, Mr. MacIan, perhaps you had better explain the
situation."

The tall Scotchman in grey took a step forward and spoke in a
voice quite clear and bold, and yet somehow lifeless, like a man
going through an ancient formality.

"The fact is, Mr. Gordon, we have to place our honour in your
hands.  Words have passed between Mr. Turnbull and myself on a
grave and invaluable matter, which can only be atoned for by
fighting.  Unfortunately, as the police are in some sense pursuing
us, we are hurried, and must fight now and without seconds.  But
if you will be so kind as to take us into your little garden and
see far play, we shall feel how----"

The shopman recovered himself from a stunning surprise and burst
out:

"Gentlemen, are you drunk?  A duel!  A duel in my garden.  Go
home, gentlemen, go home.  Why, what did you quarrel about?"

"We quarrelled," said Evan, in the same dead voice, "about
religion."  The fat shopkeeper rolled about in his chair with
enjoyment.

"Well, this is a funny game," he said.  "So you want to commit
murder on behalf of religion.  Well, well my religion is a little
respect for humanity, and----"

"Excuse me," cut in Turnbull, suddenly and fiercely, pointing
towards the pawnbroker's next door.  "Don't you own that shop?"

"Why--er--yes," said Gordon.

"And don't you own that shop?" repeated the secularist, pointing
backward to the pornographic bookseller.

"What if I do?"

"Why, then," cried Turnbull, with grating contempt.  "I will leave
the religion of humanity confidently in your hands; but I am
sorry I troubled you about such a thing as honour.  Look here, my
man. I do believe in humanity.  I do believe in liberty.  My father
died for it under the swords of the Yeomanry.  I am going to die
for it, if need be, under that sword on your counter.  But if
there is one sight that makes me doubt it it is your foul fat
face.  It is hard to believe you were not meant to be ruled like a
dog or killed like a cockroach.  Don't try your slave's philosophy
on me.  We are going to fight, and we are going to fight in your
garden, with your swords.  Be still!  Raise your voice above a
whisper, and I run you through the body."

Turnbull put the bright point of the sword against the gay
waistcoat of the dealer, who stood choking with rage and fear,
and an astonishment so crushing as to be greater than either.

"MacIan," said Turnbull, falling almost into the familiar tone of
a business partner, "MacIan, tie up this fellow and put a gag in
his mouth.  Be still, I say, or I kill you where you stand."

The man was too frightened to scream, but he struggled wildly,
while Evan MacIan, whose long, lean hands were unusually
powerful, tightened some old curtain cords round him, strapped a
rope gag in his mouth and rolled him on his back on the floor.

"There's nothing very strong here," said Evan, looking about him.
"I'm afraid he'll work through that gag in half an hour or so."

"Yes," said Turnbull, "but one of us will be killed by that
time."

"Well, let's hope so," said the Highlander, glancing doubtfully
at the squirming thing on the floor.

"And now," said Turnbull, twirling his fiery moustache and
fingering his sword, "let us go into the garden.  What an
exquisite summer evening!"

MacIan said nothing, but lifting his sword from the counter went
out into the sun.

The brilliant light ran along the blades, filling the channels of
them with white fire; the combatants stuck their swords in the
turf and took off their hats, coats, waistcoats, and boots.  Evan
said a short Latin prayer to himself, during which Turnbull made
something of a parade of lighting a cigarette which he flung away
the instant after, when he saw MacIan apparently standing ready.
Yet MacIan was not exactly ready.  He stood staring like a man
stricken with a trance.

"What are you staring at?" asked Turnbull.  "Do you see the
bobbies?"

"I see Jerusalem," said Evan, "all covered with the shields and
standards of the Saracens."

"Jerusalem!" said Turnbull, laughing.  "Well, we've taken the only
inhabitant into captivity."

And he picked up his sword and made it whistle like a boy's wand.

"I beg your pardon," said MacIan, dryly.  "Let us begin."

MacIan made a military salute with his weapon, which Turnbull
copied or parodied with an impatient contempt; and in the
stillness of the garden the swords came together with a clear
sound like a bell.  The instant the blades touched, each felt them
tingle to their very points with a personal vitality, as if they
were two naked nerves of steel.  Evan had worn throughout an air
of apathy, which might have been the stale apathy of one who
wants nothing.  But it was indeed the more dreadful apathy of one
who wants something and will care for nothing else.  And this was
seen suddenly; for the instant Evan engaged he disengaged and
lunged with an infernal violence.  His opponent with a desperate
promptitude parried and riposted; the parry only just succeeded,
the riposte failed.  Something big and unbearable seemed to have
broken finally out of Evan in that first murderous lunge, leaving
him lighter and cooler and quicker upon his feet.  He fell to
again, fiercely still, but now with a fierce caution.  The next
moment Turnbull lunged; MacIan seemed to catch the point and
throw it away from him, and was thrusting back like a
thunderbolt, when a sound paralysed him; another sound beside
their ringing weapons.  Turnbull, perhaps from an equal
astonishment, perhaps from chivalry, stopped also and forebore to
send his sword through his exposed enemy.

"What's that?" asked Evan, hoarsely.

A heavy scraping sound, as of a trunk being dragged along a
littered floor, came from the dark shop behind them.

"The old Jew has broken one of his strings, and he's crawling
about," said Turnbull.  "Be quick! We must finish before he gets
his gag out."

"Yes, yes, quick! On guard!" cried the Highlander.  The blades
crossed again with the same sound like song, and the men went to
work again with the same white and watchful faces.  Evan, in his
impatience, went back a little to his wildness.  He made
windmills, as the French duellists say, and though he was
probably a shade the better fencer of the two, he found the
other's point pass his face twice so close as almost to graze his
cheek.  The second time he realized the actual possibility of
defeat and pulled himself together under a shock of the sanity of
anger.  He narrowed, and, so to speak, tightened his operations:
he fenced (as the swordsman's boast goes), in a wedding ring; he
turned Turnbull's thrusts with a maddening and almost mechanical
click, like that of a machine.  Whenever Turnbull's sword sought
to go over that other mere white streak it seemed to be caught in
a complex network of steel.  He turned one thrust, turned another,
turned another.  Then suddenly he went forward at the lunge with
his whole living weight.  Turnbull leaped back, but Evan lunged
and lunged and lunged again like a devilish piston rod or
battering ram.  And high above all the sound of the struggle there
broke into the silent evening a bellowing human voice, nasal,
raucous, at the highest pitch of pain.  "Help!  Help!  Police!
Murder!  Murder!"  The gag was broken; and the tongue of terror
was loose.

"Keep on!" gasped Turnbull.  "One may be killed before they come."

The voice of the screaming shopkeeper was loud enough to drown
not only the noise of the swords but all other noises around it,
but even through its rending din there seemed to be some other
stir or scurry.  And Evan, in the very act of thrusting at
Turnbull, saw something in his eyes that made him drop his sword.
The atheist, with his grey eyes at their widest and wildest, was
staring straight over his shoulder at the little archway of shop
that opened on the street beyond.  And he saw the archway blocked
and blackened with strange figures.

"We must bolt, MacIan," he said abruptly.  "And there isn't a
damned second to lose either.  Do as I do."

With a bound he was beside the little cluster of his clothes and
boots that lay on the lawn; he snatched them up, without waiting
to put any of them on; and tucking his sword under his other arm,
went wildly at the wall at the bottom of the garden and swung
himself over it.  Three seconds after he had alighted in his socks
on the other side, MacIan alighted beside him, also in his socks
and also carrying clothes and sword in a desperate bundle.

They were in a by-street, very lean and lonely itself, but so
close to a crowded thoroughfare that they could see the vague
masses of vehicles going by, and could even see an individual
hansom cab passing the corner at the instant.  Turnbull put his
fingers to his mouth like a gutter-snipe and whistled twice.  Even
as he did so he could hear the loud voices of the neighbours and
the police coming down the garden.

The hansom swung sharply and came tearing down the little lane at
his call.  When the cabman saw his fares, however, two wild-haired
men in their shirts and socks with naked swords under their arms,
he not unnaturally brought his readiness to a rigid stop and
stared suspiciously.

"You talk to him a minute," whispered Turnbull, and stepped back
into the shadow of the wall.

"We want you," said MacIan to the cabman, with a superb Scotch
drawl of indifference and assurance, "to drive us to St. Pancras
Station--verra quick."

"Very sorry, sir," said the cabman, "but I'd like to know it was
all right.  Might I arst where you come from, sir?"

A second after he spoke MacIan heard a heavy voice on the other
side of the wall, saying: "I suppose I'd better get over and look
for them.  Give me a back."

"Cabby," said MacIan, again assuming the most deliberate and
lingering lowland Scotch intonation, "if ye're really verra
anxious to ken whar a' come fra', I'll tell ye as a verra great
secret.  A' come from Scotland.  And a'm gaein' to St. Pancras
Station.  Open the doors, cabby."

The cabman stared, but laughed.  The heavy voice behind the wall
said: "Now then, a better back this time, Mr. Price."  And from
the shadow of the wall Turnbull crept out.  He had struggled
wildly into his coat (leaving his waistcoat on the pavement), and
he was with a fierce pale face climbing up the cab behind the
cabman.  MacIan had no glimmering notion of what he was up to, but
an instinct of discipline, inherited from a hundred men of war,
made him stick to his own part and trust the other man's.

"Open the doors, cabby," he repeated, with something of the
obstinate solemnity of a drunkard, "open the doors.  Did ye no
hear me say St. Pancras Station?"

The top of a policeman's helmet appeared above the garden wall.
The cabman did not see it, but he was still suspicious and began:

"Very sorry, sir, but..." and with that the catlike Turnbull tore
him out of his seat and hurled him into the street below, where
he lay suddenly stunned.

"Give me his hat," said Turnbull in a silver voice, that the
other obeyed like a bugle.  "And get inside with the swords."

And just as the red and raging face of a policeman appeared above
the wall, Turnbull struck the horse with a terrible cut of the
whip and the two went whirling away like a boomerang.

They had spun through seven streets and three or four squares
before anything further happened.  Then, in the neighbourhood of
Maida Vale, the driver opened the trap and talked through it in a
manner not wholly common in conversations through that aperture.

"Mr. MacIan," he said shortly and civilly.

"Mr. Turnbull," replied his motionless fare.

"Under circumstances such as those in which we were both recently
placed there was no time for anything but very abrupt action.  I
trust therefore that you have no cause to complain of me if I
have deferred until this moment a consultation with you on our
present position or future action.  Our present position, Mr.
MacIan, I imagine that I am under no special necessity of
describing.  We have broken the law and we are fleeing from its
officers.  Our future action is a thing about which I myself
entertain sufficiently strong views; but I have no right to
assume or to anticipate yours, though I may have formed a decided
conception of your character and a decided notion of what they
will probably be.  Still, by every principle of intellectual
justice, I am bound to ask you now and seriously whether you wish
to continue our interrupted relations."

MacIan leant his white and rather weary face back upon the
cushions in order to speak up through the open door.

"Mr. Turnbull," he said, "I have nothing to add to what I have
said before.  It is strongly borne in upon me that you and I, the
sole occupants of this runaway cab, are at this moment the two
most important people in London, possibly in Europe.  I have been
looking at all the streets as we went past, I have been looking
at all the shops as we went past, I have been looking at all the
churches as we went past.  At first, I felt a little dazed with
the vastness of it all.  I could not understand what it all meant.
But now I know exactly what it all means.  It means us.  This whole
civilization is only a dream.  You and I are the realities."

"Religious symbolism," said Mr. Turnbull, through the trap, "does
not, as you are probably aware, appeal ordinarily to thinkers of
the school to which I belong.  But in symbolism as you use it in
this instance, I must, I think, concede a certain truth.  We
_must_ fight this thing out somewhere; because, as you truly say,
we have found each other's reality.  We _must_ kill each other--or
convert each other.  I used to think all Christians were
hypocrites, and I felt quite mildly towards them really.  But I
know you are sincere--and my soul is mad against you.  In the same
way you used, I suppose, to think that all atheists thought
atheism would leave them free for immorality--and yet in your
heart you tolerated them entirely.  Now you _know_ that I am an
honest man, and you are mad against me, as I am against you.  Yes,
that's it.  You can't be angry with bad men.  But a good man in the
wrong--why one thirsts for his blood.  Yes, you open for me a
vista of thought."

"Don't run into anything," said Evan, immovably.

"There's something in that view of yours, too," said Turnbull,
and shut down the trap.

They sped on through shining streets that shot by them like
arrows.  Mr. Turnbull had evidently a great deal of unused
practical talent which was unrolling itself in this ridiculous
adventure.  They had got away with such stunning promptitude that
the police chase had in all probability not even properly begun.
But in case it had, the amateur cabman chose his dizzy course
through London with a strange dexterity.  He did not do what would
have first occurred to any ordinary outsider desiring to destroy
his tracks.  He did not cut into by-ways or twist his way through
mean streets.  His amateur common sense told him that it was
precisely the poor street, the side street, that would be likely
to remember and report the passing of a hansom cab, like the
passing of a royal procession.  He kept chiefly to the great
roads, so full of hansoms that a wilder pair than they might
easily have passed in the press.  In one of the quieter streets
Evan put on his boots.

Towards the top of Albany Street the singular cabman again opened
the trap.

"Mr. MacIan," he said, "I understand that we have now definitely
settled that in the conventional language honour is not
satisfied.  Our action must at least go further than it has gone
under recent interrupted conditions.  That, I believe, is
understood."

"Perfectly," replied the other with his bootlace in his teeth.

"Under those conditions," continued Turnbull, his voice coming
through the hole with a slight note of trepidation very unusual
with him, "I have a suggestion to make, if that can be called a
suggestion, which has probably occurred to you as readily as to
me.  Until the actual event comes off we are practically in the
position if not of comrades, at least of business partners. Until
the event comes off, therefore I should suggest that quarrelling
would be inconvenient and rather inartistic; while the ordinary
exchange of politeness between man and man would be not only
elegant but uncommonly practical."

"You are perfectly right," answered MacIan, with his melancholy
voice, "in saying that all this has occurred to me.  All duellists
should behave like gentlemen to each other.  But we, by the
queerness of our position, are something much more than either
duellists or gentlemen.  We are, in the oddest and most exact
sense of the term, brothers--in arms."

"Mr. MacIan," replied Turnbull, calmly, "no more need be said."
And he closed the trap once more.

They had reached Finchley Road before he opened it again.

Then he said, "Mr. MacIan, may I offer you a cigar.  It will be a
touch of realism."

"Thank you," answered Evan.  "You are very kind."  And he began to
smoke in the cab.



IV. A DISCUSSION AT DAWN

The duellists had from their own point of view escaped or
conquered the chief powers of the modern world.  They had
satisfied the magistrate, they had tied the tradesman neck and
heels, and they had left the police behind.  As far as their own
feelings went they had melted into a monstrous sea; they were but
the fare and driver of one of the million hansoms that fill
London streets.  But they had forgotten something; they had
forgotten journalism.  They had forgotten that there exists in
the modern world, perhaps for the first time in history, a class
of people whose interest is not that things should happen well or
happen badly, should happen successfully or happen
unsuccessfully, should happen to the advantage of this party or
the advantage of that part, but whose interest simply is that
things should happen.

It is the one great weakness of journalism as a picture of our
modern existence, that it must be a picture made up entirely of
exceptions.  We announce on flaring posters that a man has fallen
off a scaffolding.  We do not announce on flaring posters that a
man has not fallen off a scaffolding.  Yet this latter fact is
fundamentally more exciting, as indicating that that moving tower
of terror and mystery, a man, is still abroad upon the earth.
That the man has not fallen off a scaffolding is really more
sensational; and it is also some thousand times more common.  But
journalism cannot reasonably be expected thus to insist upon the
permanent miracles.  Busy editors cannot be expected to put on
their posters, "Mr. Wilkinson Still Safe," or "Mr. Jones, of
Worthing, Not Dead Yet."  They cannot announce the happiness of
mankind at all.  They cannot describe all the forks that are not
stolen, or all the marriages that are not judiciously dissolved.
Hence the complete picture they give of life is of necessity
fallacious; they can only represent what is unusual.  However
democratic they may be, they are only concerned with the
minority.

The incident of the religious fanatic who broke a window on
Ludgate Hill was alone enough to set them up in good copy for the
night.  But when the same man was brought before a magistrate and
defied his enemy to mortal combat in the open court, then the
columns would hardly hold the excruciating information, and the
headlines were so large that there was hardly room for any of the
text.  The _Daily Telegraph_ headed a column, "A Duel on
Divinity," and there was a correspondence afterwards which lasted
for months, about whether police magistrates ought to mention
religion.  The _Daily Mail_ in its dull, sensible way, headed the
events, "Wanted to fight for the Virgin."  Mr. James Douglas, in
_The Star_, presuming on his knowledge of philosophical and
theological terms, described the Christian's outbreak under the
title of "Dualist and Duellist."  The _Daily News_ inserted a
colourless account of the matter, but was pursued and eaten up
for some weeks, with letters from outlying ministers, headed
"Murder and Mariolatry."  But the journalistic temperature was
steadily and consistently heated by all these influences; the
journalists had tasted blood, prospectively, and were in the mood
for more; everything in the matter prepared them for further
outbursts of moral indignation.  And when a gasping reporter
rushed in in the last hours of the evening with the announcement
that the two heroes of the Police Court had literally been found
fighting in a London back garden, with a shopkeeper bound and
gagged in the front of the house, the editors and sub-editors
were stricken still as men are by great beatitudes.

The next morning, five or six of the great London dailies burst
out simultaneously into great blossoms of eloquent
leader-writing.  Towards the end all the leaders tended to be the
same, but they all began differently.  The _Daily Telegraph_, for
instance began, "There will be little difference among our
readers or among all truly English and law-abiding men touching
the, etc. etc."  The _Daily Mail_ said, "People must learn, in the
modern world, to keep their theological differences to
themselves.  The fracas, etc. etc."  The _Daily News_ started,
"Nothing could be more inimical to the cause of true religion
than, etc. etc."  The _Times_ began with something about Celtic
disturbances of the equilibrium of Empire, and the _Daily
Express_ distinguished itself splendidly by omitting altogether
so controversial a matter and substituting a leader about
goloshes.

And the morning after that, the editors and the newspapers were
in such a state, that, as the phrase is, there was no holding
them.  Whatever secret and elvish thing it is that broods over
editors and suddenly turns their brains, that thing had seized on
the story of the broken glass and the duel in the garden.  It
became monstrous and omnipresent, as do in our time the
unimportant doings of the sect of the Agapemonites, or as did at
an earlier time the dreary dishonesties of the Rhodesian
financiers.  Questions were asked about it, and even answered, in
the House of Commons.  The Government was solemnly denounced in
the papers for not having done something, nobody knew what, to
prevent the window being broken.  An enormous subscription was
started to reimburse Mr. Gordon, the man who had been gagged in
the shop.  Mr. MacIan, one of the combatants, became for some
mysterious reason, singly and hugely popular as a comic figure in
the comic papers and on the stage of the music hall.  He was
always represented (in defiance of fact), with red whiskers, and
a very red nose, and in full Highland costume.  And a song,
consisting of an unimaginable number of verses, in which his name
was rhymed with flat iron, the British Lion, sly 'un, dandelion,
Spion (With Kop in the next line), was sung to crowded houses
every night.  The papers developed a devouring thirst for the
capture of the fugitives; and when they had not been caught for
forty-eight hours, they suddenly turned the whole matter into a
detective mystery.  Letters under the heading, "Where are They,"
poured in to every paper, with every conceivable kind of
explanation, running them to earth in the Monument, the Twopenny
Tube, Epping Forest, Westminster Abbey, rolled up in carpets at
Shoolbreds, locked up in safes in Chancery Lane.  Yes, the papers
were very interesting, and Mr. Turnbull unrolled a whole bundle
of them for the amusement of Mr. MacIan as they sat on a high
common to the north of London, in the coming of the white dawn.

The darkness in the east had been broken with a bar of grey; the
bar of grey was split with a sword of silver and morning lifted
itself laboriously over London. From the spot where Turnbull and
MacIan were sitting on one of the barren steeps behind Hampstead,
they could see the whole of London shaping itself vaguely and
largely in the grey and growing light, until the white sun stood
over it and it lay at their feet, the splendid monstrosity that
it is.  Its bewildering squares and parallelograms were compact
and perfect as a Chinese puzzle; an enormous hieroglyphic which
man must decipher or die.  There fell upon both of them, but upon
Turnbull more than the other, because he know more what the scene
signified, that quite indescribable sense as of a sublime and
passionate and heart-moving futility, which is never evoked by
deserts or dead men or men neglected and barbarous, which can
only be invoked by the sight of the enormous genius of man
applied to anything other than the best.  Turnbull, the old
idealistic democrat, had so often reviled the democracy and
reviled them justly for their supineness, their snobbishness,
their evil reverence for idle things.  He was right enough; for
our democracy has only one great fault; it is not democratic.  And
after denouncing so justly average modern men for so many years
as sophists and as slaves, he looked down from an empty slope in
Hampstead and saw what gods they are.  Their achievement seemed
all the more heroic and divine, because it seemed doubtful
whether it was worth doing at all.  There seemed to be something
greater than mere accuracy in making such a mistake as London.
And what was to be the end of it all? what was to be the ultimate
transformation of this common and incredible London man, this
workman on a tram in Battersea, his clerk on an omnibus in
Cheapside?  Turnbull, as he stared drearily, murmured to himself
the words of the old atheistic and revolutionary Swinburne who
had intoxicated his youth:

        "And still we ask if God or man
        Can loosen thee Lazarus;
        Bid thee rise up republican,
        And save thyself and all of us.
        But no disciple's tongue can say
        If thou can'st take our sins away."

Turnbull shivered slightly as if behind the earthly morning he
felt the evening of the world, the sunset of so many hopes.  Those
words were from "Songs before Sunrise".  But Turnbull's songs at
their best were songs after sunrise, and sunrise had been no such
great thing after all.  Turnbull shivered again in the sharp
morning air.  MacIan was also gazing with his face towards the
city, but there was that about his blind and mystical stare that
told one, so to speak, that his eyes were turned inwards.  When
Turnbull said something to him about London, they seemed to move
as at a summons and come out like two householders coming out
into their doorways.

"Yes," he said, with a sort of stupidity.  "It's a very big
place."

There was a somewhat unmeaning silence, and then MacIan said
again:

"It's a very big place.  When I first came into it I was
frightened of it.  Frightened exactly as one would be frightened
at the sight of a man forty feet high.  I am used to big things
where I come from, big mountains that seem to fill God's
infinity, and the big sea that goes to the end of the world.  But
then these things are all shapeless and confused things, not made
in any familiar form.  But to see the plain, square, human things
as large as that, houses so large and streets so large, and the
town itself so large, was like having screwed some devil's
magnifying glass into one's eye.  It was like seeing a porridge
bowl as big as a house, or a mouse-trap made to catch elephants."

"Like the land of the Brobdingnagians," said Turnbull, smiling.

"Oh! Where is that?" said MacIan.

Turnbull said bitterly, "In a book," and the silence fell
suddenly between them again.

They were sitting in a sort of litter on the hillside; all the
things they had hurriedly collected, in various places, for their
flight, were strewn indiscriminately round them.  The two swords
with which they had lately sought each other's lives were flung
down on the grass at random, like two idle walking-sticks.  Some
provisions they had bought last night, at a low public house, in
case of undefined contingencies, were tossed about like the
materials of an ordinary picnic, here a basket of chocolate, and
there a bottle of wine.  And to add to the disorder finally, there
were strewn on top of everything, the most disorderly of modern
things, newspapers, and more newspapers, and yet again
newspapers, the ministers of the modern anarchy.  Turnbull picked
up one of them drearily, and took out a pipe.

"There's a lot about us," he said.  "Do you mind if I light up?"

"Why should I mind?" asked MacIan.

Turnbull eyed with a certain studious interest, the man who did
not understand any of the verbal courtesies; he lit his pipe and
blew great clouds out of it.

"Yes," he resumed. "The matter on which you and I are engaged is
at this moment really the best copy in England.  I am a
journalist, and I know.  For the first time, perhaps, for many
generations, the English are really more angry about a wrong
thing done in England than they are about a wrong thing done in
France."

"It is not a wrong thing," said MacIan.

Turnbull laughed.  "You seem unable to understand the ordinary use
of the human language.  If I did not suspect that you were a
genius, I should certainly know you were a blockhead.  I fancy we
had better be getting along and collecting our baggage."

And he jumped up and began shoving the luggage into his pockets,
or strapping it on to his back.  As he thrust a tin of canned
meat, anyhow, into his bursting side pocket, he said casually:

"I only meant that you and I are the most prominent people in the
English papers."

"Well, what did you expect?" asked MacIan, opening his great
grave blue eyes.

"The papers are full of us," said Turnbull, stooping to pick up
one of the swords.

MacIan stooped and picked up the other.

"Yes," he said, in his simple way.  "I have read what they have to
say.  But they don't seem to understand the point."

"The point of what?" asked Turnbull.

"The point of the sword," said MacIan, violently, and planted the
steel point in the soil like a man planting a tree.

"That is a point," said Turnbull, grimly, "that we will discuss
later. Come along."

Turnbull tied the last tin of biscuits desperately to himself
with string; and then spoke, like a diver girt for plunging,
short and sharp.

"Now, Mr. MacIan, you must listen to me.  You must listen to me,
not merely because I know the country, which you might learn by
looking at a map, but because I know the people of the country,
whom you could not know by living here thirty years.  That
infernal city down there is awake; and it is awake against us.
All those endless rows of windows and windows are all eyes
staring at us.  All those forests of chimneys are fingers pointing
at us, as we stand here on the hillside.  This thing has caught
on.  For the next six mortal months they will think of nothing but
us, as for six mortal months they thought of nothing but the
Dreyfus case.  Oh, I know it's funny.  They let starving children,
who don't want to die, drop by the score without looking round.
But because two gentlemen, from private feelings of delicacy, do
want to die, they will mobilize the army and navy to prevent
them.  For half a year or more, you and I, Mr. MacIan, will be an
obstacle to every reform in the British Empire.  We shall prevent
the Chinese being sent out of the Transvaal and the blocks being
stopped in the Strand.  We shall be the conversational substitute
when anyone recommends Home Rule, or complains of sky signs.
Therefore, do not imagine, in your innocence, that we have only
to melt away among those English hills as a Highland cateran
might into your god-forsaken Highland mountains.  We must be
eternally on our guard; we must live the hunted life of two
distinguished criminals.  We must expect to be recognized as much
as if we were Napoleon escaping from Elba.  We must be prepared
for our descriptions being sent to every tiny village, and for
our faces being recognized by every ambitious policeman.  We must
often sleep under the stars as if we were in Africa.  Last and
most important we must not dream of effecting our--our final
settlement, which will be a thing as famous as the Phoenix Park
murders, unless we have made real and precise arrangements for
our isolation--I will not say our safety.  We must not, in short,
fight until we have thrown them off our scent, if only for a
moment.  For, take my word for it, Mr. MacIan, if the British
Public once catches us up, the British Public will prevent the
duel, if it is only by locking us both up in asylums for the rest
of our days."

MacIan was looking at the horizon with a rather misty look.

"I am not at all surprised," he said, "at the world being against
us.  It makes me feel I was right to----"

"Yes?" said Turnbull.

"To smash your window," said MacIan.  "I have woken up the world."

"Very well, then," said Turnbull, stolidly.  "Let us look at a few
final facts.  Beyond that hill there is comparatively clear
country.  Fortunately, I know the part well, and if you will
follow me exactly, and, when necessary, on your stomach, we may
be able to get ten miles out of London, literally without meeting
anyone at all, which will be the best possible beginning, at any
rate.  We have provisions for at least two days and two nights,
three days if we do it carefully.  We may be able to get fifty or
sixty miles away without even walking into an inn door.  I have
the biscuits and the tinned meat, and the milk.  You have the
chocolate, I think?  And the brandy?"

"Yes," said MacIan, like a soldier taking orders.

"Very well, then, come on.  March.  We turn under that third bush
and so down into the valley."  And he set off ahead at a swinging
walk.

Then he stopped suddenly; for he realized that the other was not
following.  Evan MacIan was leaning on his sword with a lowering
face, like a man suddenly smitten still with doubt.

"What on earth is the matter?" asked Turnbull, staring in some
anger.

Evan made no reply.

"What the deuce is the matter with you?" demanded the leader,
again, his face slowly growing as red as his beard; then he said,
suddenly, and in a more human voice, "Are you in pain, MacIan?"

"Yes," replied the Highlander, without lifting his face.

"Take some brandy," cried Turnbull, walking forward hurriedly
towards him.  "You've got it."

"It's not in the body," said MacIan, in his dull, strange way.
"The pain has come into my mind.  A very dreadful thing has just
come into my thoughts."

"What the devil are you talking about?" asked Turnbull.

MacIan broke out with a queer and living voice.

"We must fight now, Turnbull.  We must fight now.  A frightful
thing has come upon me, and I know it must be now and here.  I
must kill you here," he cried, with a sort of tearful rage
impossible to describe.  "Here, here, upon this blessed grass."

"Why, you idiot," began Turnbull.

"The hour has come--the black hour God meant for it.  Quick, it
will soon be gone. Quick!"

And he flung the scabbard from him furiously, and stood with the
sunlight sparkling along his sword.

"You confounded fool," repeated Turnbull.  "Put that thing up
again, you ass; people will come out of that house at the first
clash of the steel."

"One of us will be dead before they come," said the other,
hoarsely, "for this is the hour God meant."

"Well, I never thought much of God," said the editor of _The
Atheist_, losing all patience.  "And I think less now.  Never mind
what God meant.  Kindly enlighten my pagan darkness as to what the
devil _you_ mean."

"The hour will soon be gone.  In a moment it will be gone," said
the madman.  "It is now, now, now that I must nail your
blaspheming body to the earth--now, now that I must avenge Our
Lady on her vile slanderer.  Now or never.  For the dreadful
thought is in my mind."

"And what thought," asked Turnbull, with frantic composure,
"occupies what you call your mind?"

"I must kill you now," said the fanatic, "because----"

"Well, because," said Turnbull, patiently.

"Because I have begun to like you."

Turnbull's face had a sudden spasm in the sunlight, a change so
instantaneous that it left no trace behind it; and his features
seemed still carved into a cold stare.  But when he spoke again he
seemed like a man who was placidly pretending to misunderstand
something that he understood perfectly well.

"Your affection expresses itself in an abrupt form," he began,
but MacIan broke the brittle and frivolous speech to pieces with
a violent voice.  "Do not trouble to talk like that," he said.
"You know what I mean as well as I know it.  Come on and fight, I
say.  Perhaps you are feeling just as I do."

Turnbull's face flinched again in the fierce sunlight, but his
attitude kept its contemptuous ease.

"Your Celtic mind really goes too fast for me," he said; "let me
be permitted in my heavy Lowland way to understand this new
development.  My dear Mr. MacIan, what do you really mean?"

MacIan still kept the shining sword-point towards the other's
breast.

"You know what I mean.  You mean the same yourself.  We must
fight now or else----"

"Or else?" repeated Turnbull, staring at him with an almost
blinding gravity.

"Or else we may not want to fight at all," answered Evan, and the
end of his speech was like a despairing cry.

Turnbull took out his own sword suddenly as if to engage; then
planting it point downwards for a moment, he said, "Before we
begin, may I ask you a question?"

MacIan bowed patiently, but with burning eyes.

"You said, just now," continued Turnbull, presently, "that if we
did not fight now, we might not want to fight at all.  How would
you feel about the matter if we came not to want to fight at
all?"

"I should feel," answered the other, "just as I should feel if
you had drawn your sword, and I had run away from it.  I should
feel that because I had been weak, justice had not been done."

"Justice," answered Turnbull, with a thoughtful smile, "but we
are talking about your feelings.  And what do you mean by justice,
apart from your feelings?"

MacIan made a gesture of weary recognition!  "Oh, Nominalism," he
said, with a sort of sigh, "we had all that out in the twelfth
century."

"I wish we could have it out now," replied the other, firmly.  "Do
you really mean that if you came to think me right, you would be
certainly wrong?"

"If I had a blow on the back of my head, I might come to think
you a green elephant," answered MacIan, "but have I not the right
to say now, that if I thought that I should think wrong?"

"Then you are quite certain that it would be wrong to like me?"
asked Turnbull, with a slight smile.

"No," said Evan, thoughtfully, "I do not say that.  It may not be
the devil, it may be some part of God I am not meant to know.  But
I had a work to do, and it is making the work difficult."

"And I suppose," said the atheist, quite gently, "that you and I
know all about which part of God we ought to know."

MacIan burst out like a man driven back and explaining
everything.

"The Church is not a thing like the Athenaeum Club," he cried.
"If the Athenaeum Club lost all its members, the Athenaeum Club
would dissolve and cease to exist.  But when we belong to the
Church we belong to something which is outside all of us; which
is outside everything you talk about, outside the Cardinals and
the Pope.  They belong to it, but it does not belong to them.  If
we all fell dead suddenly, the Church would still somehow exist
in God.  Confound it all, don't you see that I am more sure of its
existence than I am of my own existence?  And yet you ask me to
trust my temperament, my own temperament, which can be turned
upside down by two bottles of claret or an attack of the
jaundice.  You ask me to trust that when it softens towards you
and not to trust the thing which I believe to be outside myself
and more real than the blood in my body."

"Stop a moment," said Turnbull, in the same easy tone, "Even in
the very act of saying that you believe this or that, you imply
that there is a part of yourself that you trust even if there are
many parts which you mistrust.  If it is only you that like me,
surely, also, it is only you that believe in the Catholic
Church."

Evan remained in an unmoved and grave attitude.  "There is a part
of me which is divine," he answered, "a part that can be trusted,
but there are also affections which are entirely animal and
idle."

"And you are quite certain, I suppose," continued Turnbull, "that
if even you esteem me the esteem would be wholly animal and
idle?"  For the first time MacIan started as if he had not
expected the thing that was said to him.  At last he said:

"Whatever in earth or heaven it is that has joined us two
together, it seems to be something which makes it impossible to
lie.  No, I do not think that the movement in me towards you
was...was that surface sort of thing.  It may have been something
deeper...something strange.  I cannot understand the thing at all.
But understand this and understand it thoroughly, if I loved you
my love might be divine.  No, it is not some trifle that we are
fighting about.  It is not some superstition or some symbol.  When
you wrote those words about Our Lady, you were in that act a
wicked man doing a wicked thing.  If I hate you it is because you
have hated goodness.  And if I like you...it is because you are
good."

Turnbull's face wore an indecipherable expression.

"Well, shall we fight now?" he said.

"Yes," said MacIan, with a sudden contraction of his black brows,
"yes, it must be now."

The bright swords crossed, and the first touch of them,
travelling down blade and arm, told each combatant that the heart
of the other was awakened.  It was not in that way that the swords
rang together when they had rushed on each other in the little
garden behind the dealer's shop.

There was a pause, and then MacIan made a movement as if to
thrust, and almost at the same moment Turnbull suddenly and
calmly dropped his sword.  Evan stared round in an unusual
bewilderment, and then realized that a large man in pale clothes
and a Panama hat was strolling serenely towards them.



V. THE PEACEMAKER

When the combatants, with crossed swords, became suddenly
conscious of a third party, they each made the same movement.  It
was as quick as the snap of a pistol, and they altered it
instantaneously and recovered their original pose, but they had
both made it, they had both seen it, and they both knew what it
was.  It was not a movement of anger at being interrupted.  Say or
think what they would, it was a movement of relief.  A force
within them, and yet quite beyond them, seemed slowly and
pitilessly washing away the adamant of their oath.  As mistaken
lovers might watch the inevitable sunset of first love, these men
watched the sunset of their first hatred.

Their hearts were growing weaker and weaker against each other.
When their weapons rang and riposted in the little London garden,
they could have been very certain that if a third party had
interrupted them something at least would have happened.  They
would have killed each other or they would have killed him.  But
now nothing could undo or deny that flash of fact, that for a
second they had been glad to be interrupted.  Some new and strange
thing was rising higher and higher in their hearts like a high
sea at night.  It was something that seemed all the more
merciless, because it might turn out an enormous mercy.  Was
there, perhaps, some such fatalism in friendship as all lovers
talk about in love?  Did God make men love each other against
their will?

"I'm sure you'll excuse my speaking to you," said the stranger,
in a voice at once eager and deprecating.

The voice was too polite for good manners.  It was incongruous
with the eccentric spectacle of the duellists which ought to have
startled a sane and free man.  It was also incongruous with the
full and healthy, though rather loose physique of the man who
spoke.  At the first glance he looked a fine animal, with curling
gold beard and hair, and blue eyes, unusually bright.  It was only
at the second glance that the mind felt a sudden and perhaps
unmeaning irritation at the way in which the gold beard retreated
backwards into the waistcoat, and the way in which the finely
shaped nose went forward as if smelling its way.  And it was only,
perhaps, at the hundredth glance that the bright blue eyes, which
normally before and after the instant seemed brilliant with
intelligence, seemed as it were to be brilliant with idiocy.  He
was a heavy, healthy-looking man, who looked all the larger
because of the loose, light coloured clothes that he wore, and
that had in their extreme lightness and looseness, almost a touch
of the tropics.  But a closer examination of his attire would have
shown that even in the tropics it would have been unique; but it
was all woven according to some hygienic texture which no human
being had ever heard of before, and which was absolutely
necessary even for a day's health.  He wore a huge broad-brimmed
hat, equally hygienic, very much at the back of his head, and his
voice coming out of so heavy and hearty a type of man was, as I
have said, startlingly shrill and deferential.

"I'm sure you'll excuse my speaking to you," he said.  "Now, I
wonder if you are in some little difficulty which, after all, we
could settle very comfortably together?  Now, you don't mind my
saying this, do you?"

The face of both combatants remained somewhat solid under this
appeal.  But the stranger, probably taking their silence for a
gathering shame, continued with a kind of gaiety:

"So you are the young men I have read about in the papers.  Well,
of course, when one is young, one is rather romantic.  Do you know
what I always say to young people?"

A blank silence followed this gay inquiry.  Then Turnbull said in
a colourless voice:

"As I was forty-seven last birthday, I probably came into the
world too soon for the experience."

"Very good, very good," said the friendly person.  "Dry Scotch
humour.  Dry Scotch humour.  Well now. I understand that you two
people want to fight a duel.  I suppose you aren't much up in the
modern world.  We've quite outgrown duelling, you know.  In fact,
Tolstoy tells us that we shall soon outgrow war, which he says is
simply a duel between nations.  A duel between nations.  But there
is no doubt about our having outgrown duelling."

Waiting for some effect upon his wooden auditors, the stranger
stood beaming for a moment and then resumed:

"Now, they tell me in the newspapers that you are really wanting
to fight about something connected with Roman Catholicism.  Now,
do you know what I always say to Roman Catholics?"

"No," said Turnbull, heavily.  "Do _they_?"  It seemed to be a
characteristic of the hearty, hygienic gentleman that he always
forgot the speech he had made the moment before.  Without
enlarging further on the fixed form of his appeal to the Church
of Rome, he laughed cordially at Turnbull's answer; then his
wandering blue eyes caught the sunlight on the swords, and he
assumed a good-humoured gravity.

"But you know this is a serious matter," he said, eyeing Turnbull
and MacIan, as if they had just been keeping the table in a roar
with their frivolities.  "I am sure that if I appealed to your
higher natures...your higher natures.  Every man has a higher
nature and a lower nature.  Now, let us put the matter very
plainly, and without any romantic nonsense about honour or
anything of that sort.  Is not bloodshed a great sin?"

"No," said MacIan, speaking for the first time.

"Well, really, really!" said the peacemaker.

"Murder is a sin," said the immovable Highlander.  "There is no
sin of bloodshed."

"Well, we won't quarrel about a word," said the other,
pleasantly.

"Why on earth not?" said MacIan, with a sudden asperity.  "Why
shouldn't we quarrel about a word?  What is the good of words if
they aren't important enough to quarrel over?  Why do we choose
one word more than another if there isn't any difference between
them?  If you called a woman a chimpanzee instead of an angel,
wouldn't there be a quarrel about a word?  If you're not going to
argue about words, what are you going to argue about?  Are you
going to convey your meaning to me by moving your ears?  The
Church and the heresies always used to fight about words, because
they are the only things worth fighting about.  I say that murder
is a sin, and bloodshed is not, and that there is as much
difference between those words as there is between the word 'yes'
and the word 'no'; or rather more difference, for 'yes' and 'no',
at least, belong to the same category.  Murder is a spiritual
incident.  Bloodshed is a physical incident.  A surgeon commits
bloodshed.

"Ah, you're a casuist!" said the large man, wagging his head.
"Now, do you know what I always say to casuists...?"

MacIan made a violent gesture; and Turnbull broke into open
laughter.  The peacemaker did not seem to be in the least annoyed,
but continued in unabated enjoyment.

"Well, well," he said, "let us get back to the point.  Now Tolstoy
has shown that force is no remedy; so you see the position in
which I am placed.  I am doing my best to stop what I'm sure you
won't mind my calling this really useless violence, this really
quite wrong violence of yours.  But it's against my principles to
call in the police against you, because the police are still on a
lower moral plane, so to speak, because, in short, the police
undoubtedly sometimes employ force.  Tolstoy has shown that
violence merely breeds violence in the person towards whom it is
used, whereas Love, on the other hand, breeds Love.  So you see
how I am placed.  I am reduced to use Love in order to stop you.
I am obliged to use Love."

He gave to the word an indescribable sound of something hard and
heavy, as if he were saying "boots".  Turnbull suddenly gripped
his sword and said, shortly, "I see how you are placed quite
well, sir.  You will not call the police.  Mr. MacIan, shall we
engage?"  MacIan plucked his sword out of the grass.

"I must and will stop this shocking crime," cried the Tolstoian,
crimson in the face.  "It is against all modern ideas.  It is
against the principle of love.  How you, sir, who pretend to be a
Christian..."

MacIan turned upon him with a white face and bitter lip.  "Sir,"
he said, "talk about the principle of love as much as you like.
You seem to me colder than a lump of stone; but I am willing to
believe that you may at some time have loved a cat, or a dog, or
a child.  When you were a baby, I suppose you loved your mother.
Talk about love, then, till the world is sick of the word.  But
don't you talk about Christianity.  Don't you dare to say one
word, white or black, about it.  Christianity is, as far as you
are concerned, a horrible mystery.  Keep clear of it, keep silent
upon it, as you would upon an abomination.  It is a thing that has
made men slay and torture each other; and you will never know
why.  It is a thing that has made men do evil that good might
come; and you will never understand the evil, let alone the good.
Christianity is a thing that could only make you vomit, till you
are other than you are.  I would not justify it to you even if I
could.  Hate it, in God's name, as Turnbull does, who is a man.
It is a monstrous thing, for which men die.  And if you will stand
here and talk about love for another ten minutes it is very
probable that you will see a man die for it."

And he fell on guard.  Turnbull was busy settling something loose
in his elaborate hilt, and the pause was broken by the stranger.

"Suppose I call the police?" he said, with a heated face.

"And deny your most sacred dogma," said MacIan.

"Dogma!" cried the man, in a sort of dismay.  "Oh, we have no
_dogmas_, you know!"

There was another silence, and he said again, airily:

"You know, I think, there's something in what Shaw teaches about
no moral principles being quite fixed.  Have you ever read _The
Quintessence of Ibsenism_?  Of course he went very wrong over the
war."

Turnbull, with a bent, flushed face, was tying up the loose piece
of the pommel with string.  With the string in his teeth, he said,
"Oh, make up your damned mind and clear out!"

"It's a serious thing," said the philosopher, shaking his head.
"I must be alone and consider which is the higher point of view.
I rather feel that in a case so extreme as this..." and he went
slowly away.  As he disappeared among the trees, they heard him
murmuring in a sing-song voice, "New occasions teach new duties,"
out of a poem by James Russell Lowell.

"Ah," said MacIan, drawing a deep breath.  "Don't you believe in
prayer now?  I prayed for an angel."

"An hour ago," said the Highlander, in his heavy meditative
voice, "I felt the devil weakening my heart and my oath against
you, and I prayed that God would send an angel to my aid."

"Well?" inquired the other, finishing his mending and wrapping
the rest of the string round his hand to get a firmer grip.

"Well?"

"Well, that man was an angel," said MacIan.

"I didn't know they were as bad as that," answered Turnbull.

"We know that devils sometimes quote Scripture and counterfeit
good," replied the mystic.  "Why should not angels sometimes come
to show us the black abyss of evil on whose brink we stand.  If
that man had not tried to stop us...I might...I might have
stopped."

"I know what you mean," said Turnbull, grimly.

"But then he came," broke out MacIan, "and my soul said to me:
'Give up fighting, and you will become like That.  Give up vows
and dogmas, and fixed things, and you may grow like That.  You may
learn, also, that fog of false philosophy.  You may grow fond of
that mire of crawling, cowardly morals, and you may come to think
a blow bad, because it hurts, and not because it humiliates.  You
may come to think murder wrong, because it is violent, and not
because it is unjust.  Oh, you blasphemer of the good, an hour ago
I almost loved you!  But do not fear for me now.  I have heard the
word Love pronounced in _his_ intonation; and I know exactly what
it means. On guard!'"

The swords caught on each other with a dreadful clang and jar,
full of the old energy and hate; and at once plunged and
replunged.  Once more each man's heart had become the magnet of a
mad sword.  Suddenly, furious as they were, they were frozen for a
moment motionless.

"What noise is that?" asked the Highlander, hoarsely.

"I think I know," replied Turnbull.

"What?... What?" cried the other.

"The student of Shaw and Tolstoy has made up his remarkable
mind," said Turnbull, quietly.  "The police are coming up the
hill."



VI. THE OTHER PHILOSOPHER

Between high hedges in Hertfordshire, hedges so high as to create
a kind of grove, two men were running.  They did not run in a
scampering or feverish manner, but in the steady swing of the
pendulum.  Across the great plains and uplands to the right and
left of the lane, a long tide of sunset light rolled like a sea
of ruby, lighting up the long terraces of the hills and picking
out the few windows of the scattered hamlets in startling
blood-red sparks.  But the lane was cut deep in the hill and
remained in an abrupt shadow.  The two men running in it had an
impression not uncommonly experienced between those wild green
English walls; a sense of being led between the walls of a maze.

Though their pace was steady it was vigorous; their faces were
heated and their eyes fixed and bright.  There was, indeed,
something a little mad in the contrast between the evening's
stillness over the empty country-side, and these two figures
fleeing wildly from nothing.  They had the look of two lunatics,
possibly they were.

"Are you all right?" said Turnbull, with civility.  "Can you keep
this up?"

"Quite easily, thank you," replied MacIan.  "I run very well."

"Is that a qualification in a family of warriors?" asked
Turnbull.

"Undoubtedly.  Rapid movement is essential," answered MacIan, who
never saw a joke in his life.

Turnbull broke out into a short laugh, and silence fell between
them, the panting silence of runners.

Then MacIan said: "We run better than any of those policemen.
They are too fat.  Why do you make your policemen so fat?"

"I didn't do much towards making them fat myself," replied
Turnbull, genially, "but I flatter myself that I am now doing
something towards making them thin.  You'll see they will be as
lean as rakes by the time they catch us.  They will look like your
friend, Cardinal Manning."

"But they won't catch us," said MacIan, in his literal way.

"No, we beat them in the great military art of running away,"
returned the other.  "They won't catch us unless----"

MacIan turned his long equine face inquiringly.  "Unless what?" he
said, for Turnbull had gone silent suddenly, and seemed to be
listening intently as he ran as a horse does with his ears turned
back.

"Unless what?" repeated the Highlander.

"Unless they do--what they have done.  Listen."  MacIan slackened
his trot, and turned his head to the trail they had left behind
them.  Across two or three billows of the up and down lane came
along the ground the unmistakable throbbing of horses' hoofs.

"They have put the mounted police on us," said Turnbull, shortly.
"Good Lord, one would think we were a Revolution."

"So we are," said MacIan calmly.  "What shall we do? Shall we turn
on them with our points?"

"It may come to that," answered Turnbull, "though if it does, I
reckon that will be the last act.  We must put it off if we can."
And he stared and peered about him between the bushes.  "If we
could hide somewhere the beasts might go by us," he said.  "The
police have their faults, but thank God they're inefficient.  Why,
here's the very thing.  Be quick and quiet.  Follow me."

He suddenly swung himself up the high bank on one side of the
lane.  It was almost as high and smooth as a wall, and on the top
of it the black hedge stood out over them as an angle, almost
like a thatched roof of the lane.  And the burning evening sky
looked down at them through the tangle with red eyes as of an
army of goblins.

Turnbull hoisted himself up and broke the hedge with his body.  As
his head and shoulders rose above it they turned to flame in the
full glow as if lit up by an immense firelight.  His red hair and
beard looked almost scarlet, and his pale face as bright as a
boy's.  Something violent, something that was at once love and
hatred, surged in the strange heart of the Gael below him.  He had
an unutterable sense of epic importance, as if he were somehow
lifting all humanity into a prouder and more passionate region of
the air.  As he swung himself up also into the evening light he
felt as if he were rising on enormous wings.

Legends of the morning of the world which he had heard in
childhood or read in youth came back upon him in a cloudy
splendour, purple tales of wrath and friendship, like Roland and
Oliver, or Balin and Balan, reminding him of emotional
entanglements.  Men who had loved each other and then fought each
other; men who had fought each other and then loved each other,
together made a mixed but monstrous sense of momentousness.  The
crimson seas of the sunset seemed to him like a bursting out of
some sacred blood, as if the heart of the world had broken.

Turnbull was wholly unaffected by any written or spoken poetry;
his was a powerful and prosaic mind.  But even upon him there came
for the moment something out of the earth and the passionate ends
of the sky.  The only evidence was in his voice, which was still
practical but a shade more quiet.

"Do you see that summer-house-looking thing over there?" he asked
shortly.  "That will do for us very well."

Keeping himself free from the tangle of the hedge he strolled
across a triangle of obscure kitchen garden, and approached a
dismal shed or lodge a yard or two beyond it.  It was a
weather-stained hut of grey wood, which with all its desolation
retained a tag or two of trivial ornament, which suggested that
the thing had once been a sort of summer-house, and the place
probably a sort of garden.

"That is quite invisible from the road," said Turnbull, as he
entered it, "and it will cover us up for the night."

MacIan looked at him gravely for a few moments.  "Sir," he said,
"I ought to say something to you.  I ought to say----"

"Hush," said Turnbull, suddenly lifting his hand; "be still,
man."

In the sudden silence, the drumming of the distant horses grew
louder and louder with inconceivable rapidity, and the cavalcade
of police rushed by below them in the lane, almost with the roar
and rattle of an express train.

"I ought to tell you," continued MacIan, still staring stolidly
at the other, "that you are a great chief, and it is good to go
to war behind you."

Turnbull said nothing, but turned and looked out of the foolish
lattice of the little windows, then he said, "We must have food
and sleep first."

When the last echo of their eluded pursuers had died in the
distant uplands, Turnbull began to unpack the provisions with the
easy air of a man at a picnic.  He had just laid out the last
items, put a bottle of wine on the floor, and a tin of salmon on
the window-ledge, when the bottomless silence of that forgotten
place was broken.  And it was broken by three heavy blows of a
stick delivered upon the door.

Turnbull looked up in the act of opening a tin and stared
silently at his companion.  MacIan's long, lean mouth had shut
hard.

"Who the devil can that be?" said Turnbull.

"God knows," said the other.  "It might be God."

Again the sound of the wooden stick reverberated on the wooden
door.  It was a curious sound and on consideration did not
resemble the ordinary effects of knocking on a door for
admittance.  It was rather as if the point of a stick were plunged
again and again at the panels in an absurd attempt to make a hole
in them.

A wild look sprang into MacIan's eyes and he got up half
stupidly, with a kind of stagger, put his hand out and caught one
of the swords.  "Let us fight at once," he cried, "it is the end
of the world."

"You're overdone, MacIan," said Turnbull, putting him on one
side.  "It's only someone playing the goat.  Let me open the
door."

But he also picked up a sword as he stepped to open it.

He paused one moment with his hand on the handle and then flung
the door open.  Almost as he did so the ferrule of an ordinary
bamboo cane came at his eyes, so that he had actually to parry it
with the naked weapon in his hands.  As the two touched, the point
of the stick was dropped very abruptly, and the man with the
stick stepped hurriedly back.

Against the heraldic background of sprawling crimson and gold
offered him by the expiring sunset, the figure of the man with
the stick showed at first merely black and fantastic.  He was a
small man with two wisps of long hair that curled up on each
side, and seen in silhouette, looked like horns.  He had a bow tie
so big that the two ends showed on each side of his neck like
unnatural stunted wings.  He had his long black cane still tilted
in his hand like a fencing foil and half presented at the open
door.  His large straw hat had fallen behind him as he leapt
backwards.

"With reference to your suggestion, MacIan," said Turnbull,
placidly, "I think it looks more like the Devil."

"Who on earth are you?" cried the stranger in a high shrill
voice, brandishing his cane defensively.

"Let me see," said Turnbull, looking round to MacIan with the
same blandness.  "Who are we?"

"Come out," screamed the little man with the stick.

"Certainly," said Turnbull, and went outside with the sword,
MacIan following.

Seen more fully, with the evening light on his face, the strange
man looked a little less like a goblin.  He wore a square
pale-grey jacket suit, on which the grey butterfly tie was the
only indisputable touch of affectation.  Against the great sunset
his figure had looked merely small: seen in a more equal light it
looked tolerably compact and shapely.  His reddish-brown hair,
combed into two great curls, looked like the long, slow curling
hair of the women in some pre-Raphaelite pictures.  But within
this feminine frame of hair his face was unexpectedly impudent,
like a monkey's.

"What are you doing here?" he said, in a sharp small voice.

"Well," said MacIan, in his grave childish way, "what are _you_
doing here?"

"I," said the man, indignantly, "I'm in my own garden."

"Oh," said MacIan, simply, "I apologize."

Turnbull was coolly curling his red moustache, and the stranger
stared from one to the other, temporarily stunned by their
innocent assurance.

"But, may I ask," he said at last, "what the devil you are doing
in my summer-house?"

"Certainly," said MacIan. "We were just going to fight."

"To fight!" repeated the man.

"We had better tell this gentleman the whole business," broke in
Turnbull.  Then turning to the stranger he said firmly, "I am
sorry, sir, but we have something to do that must be done.  And I
may as well tell you at the beginning and to avoid waste of time
or language, that we cannot admit any interference."

"We were just going to take some slight refreshment when you
interrupted us..."

The little man had a dawning expression of understanding and
stooped and picked up the unused bottle of wine, eyeing it
curiously.

Turnbull continued:

"But that refreshment was preparatory to something which I fear
you will find less comprehensible, but on which our minds are
entirely fixed, sir.  We are forced to fight a duel.  We are forced
by honour and an internal intellectual need.  Do not, for your own
sake, attempt to stop us.  I know all the excellent and ethical
things that you will want to say to us.  I know all about the
essential requirements of civil order: I have written leading
articles about them all my life.  I know all about the sacredness
of human life; I have bored all my friends with it.  Try and
understand our position.  This man and I are alone in the modern
world in that we think that God is essentially important.  I think
He does not exist; that is where the importance comes in for me.
But this man thinks that He does exist, and thinking that very
properly thinks Him more important than anything else.  Now we
wish to make a great demonstration and assertion--something that
will set the world on fire like the first Christian persecutions.
If you like, we are attempting a mutual martyrdom.  The papers
have posted up every town against us.  Scotland Yard has fortified
every police station with our enemies; we are driven therefore to
the edge of a lonely lane, and indirectly to taking liberties
with your summer-house in order to arrange our..."

"Stop!" roared the little man in the butterfly necktie.  "Put me
out of my intellectual misery.  Are you really the two tomfools I
have read of in all the papers?  Are you the two people who wanted
to spit each other in the Police Court?  Are you?  Are you?"

"Yes," said MacIan, "it began in a Police Court."

The little man slung the bottle of wine twenty yards away like a
stone.

"Come up to my place," he said.  "I've got better stuff than that.
I've got the best Beaune within fifty miles of here.  Come up.
You're the very men I wanted to see."

Even Turnbull, with his typical invulnerability, was a little
taken aback by this boisterous and almost brutal hospitality.

"Why...sir..." he began.

"Come up!  Come in!" howled the little man, dancing with delight.
"I'll give you a dinner.  I'll give you a bed!  I'll give you a
green smooth lawn and your choice of swords and pistols.  Why, you
fools, I adore fighting!  It's the only good thing in God's world!
I've walked about these damned fields and longed to see somebody
cut up and killed and the blood running.  Ha!  Ha!"

And he made sudden lunges with his stick at the trunk of a
neighbouring tree so that the ferrule made fierce prints and
punctures in the bark.

"Excuse me," said MacIan suddenly with the wide-eyed curiosity of
a child, "excuse me, but..."

"Well?" said the small fighter, brandishing his wooden weapon.

"Excuse me," repeated MacIan, "but was that what you were doing
at the door?"

The little man stared an instant and then said: "Yes," and
Turnbull broke into a guffaw.

"Come on!" cried the little man, tucking his stick under his arm
and taking quite suddenly to his heels.  "Come on!  Confound me,
I'll see both of you eat and then I'll see one of you die.  Lord
bless me, the gods must exist after all--they have sent me one of
my day-dreams!  Lord!  A duel!"

He had gone flying along a winding path between the borders of
the kitchen garden, and in the increasing twilight he was as hard
to follow as a flying hare.  But at length the path after many
twists betrayed its purpose and led abruptly up two or three
steps to the door of a tiny but very clean cottage.  There was
nothing about the outside to distinguish it from other cottages,
except indeed its ominous cleanliness and one thing that was out
of all the custom and tradition of all cottages under the sun.
In the middle of the little garden among the stocks and marigolds
there surged up in shapeless stone a South Sea Island idol.  There
was something gross and even evil in that eyeless and alien god
among the most innocent of the English flowers.

"Come in!" cried the creature again.  "Come in! it's better
inside!"

Whether or no it was better inside it was at least a surprise.
The moment the two duellists had pushed open the door of that
inoffensive, whitewashed cottage they found that its interior was
lined with fiery gold.  It was like stepping into a chamber in the
Arabian Nights.  The door that closed behind them shut out England
and all the energies of the West.  The ornaments that shone and
shimmered on every side of them were subtly mixed from many
periods and lands, but were all oriental.  Cruel Assyrian
bas-reliefs ran along the sides of the passage; cruel Turkish
swords and daggers glinted above and below them; the two were
separated by ages and fallen civilizations.  Yet they seemed to
sympathize since they were both harmonious and both merciless.
The house seemed to consist of chamber within chamber and created
that impression as of a dream which belongs also to the Arabian
Nights themselves.  The innermost room of all was like the inside
of a jewel.  The little man who owned it all threw himself on a
heap of scarlet and golden cushions and struck his hands
together.  A negro in a white robe and turban appeared suddenly
and silently behind them.

"Selim," said the host, "these two gentlemen are staying with me
tonight.  Send up the very best wine and dinner at once.  And
Selim, one of these gentlemen will probably die tomorrow.  Make
arrangements, please."

The negro bowed and withdrew.

Evan MacIan came out the next morning into the little garden to a
fresh silver day, his long face looking more austere than ever in
that cold light, his eyelids a little heavy.  He carried one of
the swords.  Turnbull was in the little house behind him,
demolishing the end of an early breakfast and humming a tune to
himself, which could be heard through the open window.  A moment
or two later he leapt to his feet and came out into the sunlight,
still munching toast, his own sword stuck under his arm like a
walking-stick.

Their eccentric host had vanished from sight, with a polite
gesture, some twenty minutes before.  They imagined him to be
occupied on some concerns in the interior of the house, and they
waited for his emergence, stamping the garden in silence--the
garden of tall, fresh country flowers, in the midst of which the
monstrous South Sea idol lifted itself as abruptly as the prow of
a ship riding on a sea of red and white and gold.

It was with a start, therefore, that they came upon the man
himself already in the garden.  They were all the more startled
because of the still posture in which they found him.  He was on
his knees in front of the stone idol, rigid and motionless, like
a saint in a trance or ecstasy.  Yet when Turnbull's tread broke a
twig, he was on his feet in a flash.

"Excuse me," he said with an irradiation of smiles, but yet with
a kind of bewilderment.  "So sorry...family prayers...old
fashioned...mother's knee.  Let us go on to the lawn behind."

And he ducked rapidly round the statue to an open space of grass
on the other side of it.

"This will do us best, Mr. MacIan," said he.  Then he made a
gesture towards the heavy stone figure on the pedestal which had
now its blank and shapeless back turned towards them.  "Don't you
be afraid," he added, "he can still see us."

MacIan turned his blue, blinking eyes, which seemed still misty
with sleep (or sleeplessness) towards the idol, but his brows
drew together.

The little man with the long hair also had his eyes on the back
view of the god.  His eyes were at once liquid and burning, and he
rubbed his hands slowly against each other.

"Do you know," he said, "I think he can see us better this way.
I often think that this blank thing is his real face, watching,
though it cannot be watched.  He! he!  Yes, I think he looks nice
from behind.  He looks more cruel from behind, don't you think?"

"What the devil is the thing?" asked Turnbull gruffly.

"It is the only Thing there is," answered the other.  "It is
Force."

"Oh!" said Turnbull shortly.

"Yes, my friends," said the little man, with an animated
countenance, fluttering his fingers in the air, "it was no chance
that led you to this garden; surely it was the caprice of some
old god, some happy, pitiless god.  Perhaps it was his will, for
he loves blood; and on that stone in front of him men have been
butchered by hundreds in the fierce, feasting islands of the
South.  In this cursed, craven place I have not been permitted to
kill men on his altar.  Only rabbits and cats, sometimes."

In the stillness MacIan made a sudden movement, unmeaning
apparently, and then remained rigid.

"But today, today," continued the small man in a shrill voice.
"Today his hour is come.  Today his will is done on earth as it
is in heaven.  Men, men, men will bleed before him today."  And
he bit his forefinger in a kind of fever.

Still, the two duellists stood with their swords as heavily as
statues, and the silence seemed to cool the eccentric and call
him back to more rational speech.

"Perhaps I express myself a little too lyrically," he said with
an amicable abruptness.  "My philosophy has its higher ecstasies,
but perhaps you are hardly worked up to them yet.  Let us confine
ourselves to the unquestioned.  You have found your way,
gentlemen, by a beautiful accident, to the house of the only man
in England (probably) who will favour and encourage your most
reasonable project.  From Cornwall to Cape Wrath this county is
one horrible, solid block of humanitarianism.  You will find men
who will defend this or that war in a distant continent.  They
will defend it on the contemptible ground of commerce or the more
contemptible ground of social good.  But do not fancy that you
will find one other person who will comprehend a strong man
taking the sword in his hand and wiping out his enemy.  My name
is Wimpey, Morrice Wimpey.  I had a Fellowship at Magdalen.  But I
assure you I had to drop it, owing to my having said something in
a public lecture infringing the popular prejudice against those
great gentlemen, the assassins of the Italian Renaissance.  They
let me say it at dinner and so on, and seemed to like it.  But in
a public lecture...so inconsistent.  Well, as I say, here is your
only refuge and temple of honour.  Here you can fall back on that
naked and awful arbitration which is the only thing that balances
the stars--a still, continuous violence.  _Vae Victis!_  Down,
down, down with the defeated!  Victory is the only ultimate fact.
Carthage _was_ destroyed, the Red Indians are being exterminated:
that is the single certainty.  In an hour from now that sun will
still be shining and that grass growing, and one of you will be
conquered; one of you will be the conqueror.  When it has been
done, nothing will alter it.  Heroes, I give you the hospitality
fit for heroes.  And I salute the survivor.  Fall on!"

The two men took their swords.  Then MacIan said steadily: "Mr.
Turnbull, lend me your sword a moment."

Turnbull, with a questioning glance, handed him the weapon.
MacIan took the second sword in his left hand and, with a violent
gesture, hurled it at the feet of little Mr. Wimpey.

"Fight!" he said in a loud, harsh voice.  "Fight me now!"

Wimpey took a step backward, and bewildered words bubbled on his
lips.

"Pick up that sword and fight me," repeated MacIan, with brows as
black as thunder.

The little man turned to Turnbull with a gesture, demanding
judgement or protection.

"Really, sir," he began, "this gentleman confuses..."

"You stinking little coward," roared Turnbull, suddenly releasing
his wrath.  "Fight, if you're so fond of fighting!  Fight, if
you're so fond of all that filthy philosophy!  If winning is
everything, go in and win!  If the weak must go to the wall, go to
the wall!  Fight, you rat!  Fight, or if you won't fight--run!"

And he ran at Wimpey, with blazing eyes.

Wimpey staggered back a few paces like a man struggling with his
own limbs.  Then he felt the furious Scotchman coming at him like
an express train, doubling his size every second, with eyes as
big as windows and a sword as bright as the sun.  Something broke
inside him, and he found himself running away, tumbling over his
own feet in terror, and crying out as he ran.

"Chase him!" shouted Turnbull as MacIan snatched up the sword and
joined in the scamper.  "Chase him over a county!  Chase him into
the sea!  Shoo!  Shoo!  Shoo!"

The little man plunged like a rabbit among the tall flowers, the
two duellists after him.  Turnbull kept at his tail with savage
ecstasy, still shooing him like a cat.  But MacIan, as he ran past
the South Sea idol, paused an instant to spring upon its
pedestal.  For five seconds he strained against the inert mass.
Then it stirred; and he sent it over with a great crash among the
flowers, that engulfed it altogether.  Then he went bounding after
the runaway.

In the energy of his alarm the ex-Fellow of Magdalen managed to
leap the paling of his garden.  The two pursuers went over it
after him like flying birds.  He fled frantically down a long lane
with his two terrors on his trail till he came to a gap in the
hedge and went across a steep meadow like the wind.  The two
Scotchmen, as they ran, kept up a cheery bellowing and waved
their swords.  Up three slanting meadows, down four slanting
meadows on the other side, across another road, across a heath of
snapping bracken, through a wood, across another road, and to the
brink of a big pool, they pursued the flying philosopher.  But
when he came to the pool his pace was so precipitate that he
could not stop it, and with a kind of lurching stagger, he fell
splash into the greasy water.  Getting dripping to his feet, with
the water up to his knees, the worshipper of force and victory
waded disconsolately to the other side and drew himself on to the
bank.  And Turnbull sat down on the grass and went off into
reverberations of laughter.  A second afterwards the most
extraordinary grimaces were seen to distort the stiff face of
MacIan, and unholy sounds came from within.  He had never
practised laughing, and it hurt him very much.



VII. THE VILLAGE OF GRASSLEY-IN-THE-HOLE

At about half past one, under a strong blue sky, Turnbull got up
out of the grass and fern in which he had been lying, and his
still intermittent laughter ended in a kind of yawn.

"I'm hungry," he said shortly. "Are you?"

"I have not noticed," answered MacIan.  "What are you going to
do?"

"There's a village down the road, past the pool," answered
Turnbull.  "I can see it from here.  I can see the whitewashed
walls of some cottages and a kind of corner of the church.  How
jolly it all looks.  It looks so--I don't know what the word
is--so sensible.  Don't fancy I'm under any illusions about
Arcadian virtue and the innocent villagers.  Men make beasts of
themselves there with drink, but they don't deliberately make
devils of themselves with mere talking.  They kill wild animals in
the wild woods, but they don't kill cats to the God of Victory.
They don't----"  He broke off and suddenly spat on the ground.

"Excuse me," he said; "it was ceremonial.  One has to get the
taste out of one's mouth."

"The taste of what?" asked MacIan.

"I don't know the exact name for it," replied Turnbull.  "Perhaps
it is the South Sea Islands, or it may be Magdalen College."

There was a long pause, and MacIan also lifted his large limbs
off the ground--his eyes particularly dreamy.

"I know what you mean, Turnbull," he said, "but...I always
thought you people agreed with all that."

"With all that about doing as one likes, and the individual, and
Nature loving the strongest, and all the things which that
cockroach talked about."

Turnbull's big blue-grey eyes stood open with a grave
astonishment.

"Do you really mean to say, MacIan," he said, "that you fancied
that we, the Free-thinkers, that Bradlaugh, or Holyoake, or
Ingersoll, believe all that dirty, immoral mysticism about
Nature?  Damn Nature!"

"I supposed you did," said MacIan calmly.  "It seems to me your
most conclusive position."

"And you mean to tell me," rejoined the other, "that you broke my
window, and challenged me to mortal combat, and tied a tradesman
up with ropes, and chased an Oxford Fellow across five
meadows--all under the impression that I am such an illiterate
idiot as to believe in Nature!"

"I supposed you did," repeated MacIan with his usual mildness;
"but I admit that I know little of the details of your belief--or
disbelief."

Turnbull swung round quite suddenly, and set off towards the
village.

"Come along," he cried.  "Come down to the village.  Come down to
the nearest decent inhabitable pub.  This is a case for beer."

"I do not quite follow you," said the Highlander.

"Yes, you do," answered Turnbull.  "You follow me slap into the
inn-parlour.  I repeat, this is a case for beer.  We must have the
whole of this matter out thoroughly before we go a step farther.
Do you know that an idea has just struck me of great simplicity
and of some cogency.  Do not by any means let us drop our
intentions of settling our differences with two steel swords.
But do you not think that with two pewter pots we might do what
we really have never thought of doing yet--discover what our
difference is?"

"It never occurred to me before," answered MacIan with
tranquillity.  "It is a good suggestion."

And they set out at an easy swing down the steep road to the
village of Grassley-in-the-Hole.

Grassley-in-the-Hole was a rude parallelogram of buildings, with
two thoroughfares which might have been called two high streets
if it had been possible to call them streets.  One of these ways
was higher on the slope than the other, the whole parallelogram
lying aslant, so to speak, on the side of the hill.  The upper of
these two roads was decorated with a big public house, a
butcher's shop, a small public house, a sweetstuff shop, a very
small public house, and an illegible signpost.  The lower of the
two roads boasted a horse-pond, a post office, a gentleman's
garden with very high hedges, a microscopically small public
house, and two cottages.  Where all the people lived who supported
all the public houses was in this, as in many other English
villages, a silent and smiling mystery.  The church lay a little
above and beyond the village, with a square grey tower dominating
it decisively.

But even the church was scarcely so central and solemn an
institution as the large public house, the Valencourt Arms.  It
was named after some splendid family that had long gone bankrupt,
and whose seat was occupied by a man who had invented a hygienic
bootjack; but the unfathomable sentimentalism of the English
people insisted in regarding the Inn, the seat and the sitter in
it, as alike parts of a pure and marmoreal antiquity.  And in the
Valencourt Arms festivity itself had some solemnity and decorum;
and beer was drunk with reverence, as it ought to be.  Into the
principal parlour of this place entered two strangers, who found
themselves, as is always the case in such hostels, the object,
not of fluttered curiosity or pert inquiry, but of steady,
ceaseless, devouring ocular study.  They had long coats down to
their heels, and carried under each coat something that looked
like a stick.  One was tall and dark, the other short and
red-haired.  They ordered a pot of ale each.

"MacIan," said Turnbull, lifting his tankard, "the fool who
wanted us to be friends made us want to go on fighting.  It is
only natural that the fool who wanted us to fight should make us
friendly.  MacIan, your health!"

Dusk was already dropping, the rustics in the tavern were already
lurching and lumbering out of it by twos and threes, crying
clamorous good nights to a solitary old toper that remained,
before MacIan and Turnbull had reached the really important part
of their discussion.

MacIan wore an expression of sad bewilderment not uncommon with
him.  "I am to understand, then," he said, "that you don't believe
in nature."

"You may say so in a very special and emphatic sense," said
Turnbull.  "I do not believe in nature, just as I do not believe
in Odin.  She is a myth.  It is not merely that I do not believe
that nature can guide us.  It is that I do not believe that nature
exists."

"Exists?" said MacIan in his monotonous way, settling his pewter
pot on the table.

"Yes, in a real sense nature does not exist.  I mean that nobody
can discover what the original nature of things would have been
if things had not interfered with it.  The first blade of grass
began to tear up the earth and eat it; it was interfering with
nature, if there is any nature.  The first wild ox began to tear
up the grass and eat it; he was interfering with nature, if there
is any nature.  In the same way," continued Turnbull, "the human
when it asserts its dominance over nature is just as natural as
the thing which it destroys."

"And in the same way," said MacIan almost dreamily, "the
superhuman, the supernatural is just as natural as the nature
which it destroys."

Turnbull took his head out of his pewter pot in some anger.

"The supernatural, of course," he said, "is quite another thing;
the case of the supernatural is simple.  The supernatural does not
exist."

"Quite so," said MacIan in a rather dull voice; "you said the
same about the natural.  If the natural does not exist the
supernatural obviously can't."  And he yawned a little over his
ale.

Turnbull turned for some reason a little red and remarked
quickly, "That may be jolly clever, for all I know.  But everyone
does know that there is a division between the things that as a
matter of fact do commonly happen and the things that don't.
Things that break the evident laws of nature----"

"Which does not exist," put in MacIan sleepily.  Turnbull struck
the table with a sudden hand.

"Good Lord in heaven!" he cried----

"Who does not exist," murmured MacIan.

"Good Lord in heaven!" thundered Turnbull, without regarding the
interruption.  "Do you really mean to sit there and say that you,
like anybody else, would not recognize the difference between a
natural occurrence and a supernatural one--if there could be such
a thing?  If I flew up to the ceiling----"

"You would bump your head badly," cried MacIan, suddenly starting
up.  "One can't talk of this kind of thing under a ceiling at all.
Come outside!  Come outside and ascend into heaven!"

He burst the door open on a blue abyss of evening and they
stepped out into it: it was suddenly and strangely cool.

"Turnbull," said MacIan, "you have said some things so true and
some so false that I want to talk; and I will try to talk so that
you understand.  For at present you do not understand at all.  We
don't seem to mean the same things by the same words."

He stood silent for a second or two and then resumed.

"A minute or two ago I caught you out in a real contradiction.  At
that moment logically I was right.  And at that moment I knew I
was wrong.  Yes, there is a real difference between the natural
and the supernatural: if you flew up into that blue sky this
instant, I should think that you were moved by God--or the devil.
But if you want to know what I really think...I must explain."

He stopped again, abstractedly boring the point of his sword into
the earth, and went on:

"I was born and bred and taught in a complete universe.  The
supernatural was not natural, but it was perfectly reasonable.
Nay, the supernatural to me is more reasonable than the natural;
for the supernatural is a direct message from God, who is reason.
I was taught that some things are natural and some things divine.
I mean that some things are mechanical and some things divine.
But there is the great difficulty, Turnbull.  The great difficulty
is that, according to my teaching, you are divine."

"Me! Divine?" said Turnbull truculently.  "What do you mean?"

"That is just the difficulty," continued MacIan thoughtfully.  "I
was told that there was a difference between the grass and a
man's will; and the difference was that a man's will was special
and divine.  A man's free will, I heard, was supernatural."

"Rubbish!" said Turnbull.

"Oh," said MacIan patiently, "then if a man's free will isn't
supernatural, why do your materialists deny that it exists?"

Turnbull was silent for a moment.  Then he began to speak, but
MacIan continued with the same steady voice and sad eyes:

"So what I feel is this: Here is the great divine creation I was
taught to believe in.  I can understand your disbelieving in it,
but why disbelieve in a part of it?  It was all one thing to me.
God had authority because he was God.  Man had authority because
he was man.  You cannot prove that God is better than a man; nor
can you prove that a man is better than a horse.  Why permit any
ordinary thing?  Why do you let a horse be saddled?"

"Some modern thinkers disapprove of it," said Turnbull a little
doubtfully.

"I know," said MacIan grimly; "that man who talked about love,
for instance."

Turnbull made a humorous grimace; then he said: "We seem to be
talking in a kind of shorthand; but I won't pretend not to
understand you.  What you mean is this: that you learnt about all
your saints and angels at the same time as you learnt about
common morality, from the same people, in the same way.  And you
mean to say that if one may be disputed, so may the other.  Well,
let that pass for the moment.  But let me ask you a question in
turn.  Did not this system of yours, which you swallowed whole,
contain all sorts of things that were merely local, the respect
for the chief of your clan, or such things; the village ghost,
the family feud, or what not?  Did you not take in those things,
too, along with your theology?"

MacIan stared along the dim village road, down which the last
straggler from the inn was trailing his way.

"What you say is not unreasonable," he said.  "But it is not quite
true.  The distinction between the chief and us did exist; but it
was never anything like the distinction between the human and the
divine, or the human and the animal.  It was more like the
distinction between one animal and another.  But----"

"Well?" said Turnbull.

MacIan was silent.

"Go on," repeated Turnbull; "what's the matter with you?  What are
you staring at?"

"I am staring," said MacIan at last, "at that which shall judge
us both."

"Oh, yes," said Turnbull in a tired way, "I suppose you mean
God."

"No, I don't," said MacIan, shaking his head.  "I mean him."

And he pointed to the half-tipsy yokel who was ploughing down the
road.

"What do you mean?" asked the atheist.

"I mean him," repeated MacIan with emphasis.  "He goes out in the
early dawn; he digs or he ploughs a field.  Then he comes back and
drinks ale, and then he sings a song.  All your philosophies and
political systems are young compared to him.  All your hoary
cathedrals, yes, even the Eternal Church on earth is new compared
to him.  The most mouldering gods in the British Museum are new
facts beside him.  It is he who in the end shall judge us all."

And MacIan rose to his feet with a vague excitement.

"What are you going to do?"

"I am going to ask him," cried MacIan, "which of us is right."

Turnbull broke into a kind of laugh.  "Ask that intoxicated
turnip-eater----" he began.

"Yes--which of us is right," cried MacIan violently.  "Oh, you
have long words and I have long words; and I talk of every man
being the image of God; and you talk of every man being a citizen
and enlightened enough to govern.  But if every man typifies God,
there is God.  If every man is an enlightened citizen, there is
your enlightened citizen.  The first man one meets is always man.
Let us catch him up."

And in gigantic strides the long, lean Highlander whirled away
into the grey twilight, Turnbull following with a good-humoured
oath.

The track of the rustic was easy to follow, even in the faltering
dark; for he was enlivening his wavering walk with song.  It was
an interminable poem, beginning with some unspecified King
William, who (it appeared) lived in London town and who after the
second rise vanished rather abruptly from the train of thought.
The rest was almost entirely about beer and was thick with local
topography of a quite unrecognizable kind.  The singer's step was
neither very rapid, nor, indeed, exceptionally secure; so the
song grew louder and louder and the two soon overtook him.

He was a man elderly or rather of any age, with lean grey hair
and a lean red face, but with that remarkable rustic physiognomy
in which it seems that all the features stand out independently
from the face; the rugged red nose going out like a limb; the
bleared blue eyes standing out like signals.

He gave them greeting with the elaborate urbanity of the slightly
intoxicated.  MacIan, who was vibrating with one of his silent,
violent decisions, opened the question without delay.  He
explained the philosophic position in words as short and simple
as possible.  But the singular old man with the lank red face
seemed to think uncommonly little of the short words.  He fixed
with a fierce affection upon one or two of the long ones.

"Atheists!" he repeated with luxurious scorn.  "Atheists!  I
know their sort, master.  Atheists!  Don't talk to me about 'un.
Atheists!"

The grounds of his disdain seemed a little dark and confused; but
they were evidently sufficient. MacIan resumed in some
encouragement:

"You think as I do, I hope; you think that a man should be
connected with the Church; with the common Christian----"

The old man extended a quivering stick in the direction of a
distant hill.

"There's the church," he said thickly.  "Grassley old church that
is.  Pulled down it was, in the old squire's time, and----"

"I mean," explained MacIan elaborately, "that you think that
there should be someone typifying religion, a priest----"

"Priests!" said the old man with sudden passion.  "Priests!  I
know 'un.  What they want in England?  That's what I say.  What
they want in England?"

"They want you," said MacIan.

"Quite so," said Turnbull, "and me; but they won't get us.
MacIan, your attempt on the primitive innocence does not seem
very successful.  Let me try.  What you want, my friend, is your
rights.  You don't want any priests or churches.  A vote, a right
to speak is what you----"

"Who says I a'n't got a right to speak?" said the old man, facing
round in an irrational frenzy.  "I got a right to speak.  I'm a
man, I am.  I don't want no votin' nor priests.  I say a man's a
man; that's what I say.  If a man a'n't a man, what is he?  That's
what I say, if a man a'n't a man, what is he?  When I sees a man,
I sez 'e's a man."

"Quite so," said Turnbull, "a citizen."

"I say he's a man," said the rustic furiously, stopping and
striking his stick on the ground.  "Not a city or owt else. He's a
man."

"You're perfectly right," said the sudden voice of MacIan,
falling like a sword.  "And you have kept close to something the
whole world of today tries to forget."

"Good night."

And the old man went on wildly singing into the night.

"A jolly old creature," said Turnbull; "he didn't seem able to
get much beyond that fact that a man is a man."

"Has anybody got beyond it?" asked MacIan.

Turnbull looked at him curiously.  "Are you turning an agnostic?"
he asked.

"Oh, you do not understand!" cried out MacIan.  "We Catholics are
all agnostics.  We Catholics have only in that sense got as far as
realizing that man is a man.  But your Ibsens and your Zolas and
your Shaws and your Tolstoys have not even got so far."



VIII. AN INTERLUDE OF ARGUMENT

Morning broke in bitter silver along the grey and level plain;
and almost as it did so Turnbull and MacIan came out of a low,
scrubby wood on to the empty and desolate flats.  They had walked
all night.

They had walked all night and talked all night also, and if the
subject had been capable of being exhausted they would have
exhausted it.  Their long and changing argument had taken them
through districts and landscapes equally changing.  They had
discussed Haeckel upon hills so high and steep that in spite of
the coldness of the night it seemed as if the stars might burn
them.  They had explained and re-explained the Massacre of St.
Bartholomew in little white lanes walled in with standing corn as
with walls of gold.  They had talked about Mr. Kensit in dim and
twinkling pine woods, amid the bewildering monotony of the pines.
And it was with the end of a long speech from MacIan,
passionately defending the practical achievements and the solid
prosperity of the Catholic tradition, that they came out upon the
open land.

MacIan had learnt much and thought more since he came out of the
cloudy hills of Arisaig.  He had met many typical modern figures
under circumstances which were sharply symbolic; and, moreover,
he had absorbed the main modern atmosphere from the mere presence
and chance phrases of Turnbull, as such atmospheres can always be
absorbed from the presence and the phrases of any man of great
mental vitality.  He had at last begun thoroughly to understand
what are the grounds upon which the mass of the modern world
solidly disapprove of her creed; and he threw himself into
replying to them with a hot intellectual enjoyment.

"I begin to understand one or two of your dogmas, Mr. Turnbull,"
he had said emphatically as they ploughed heavily up a wooded
hill.  "And every one that I understand I deny.  Take any one of
them you like.  You hold that your heretics and sceptics have
helped the world forward and handed on a lamp of progress.  I deny
it.  Nothing is plainer from real history than that each of your
heretics invented a complete cosmos of his own which the next
heretic smashed entirely to pieces.  Who knows now exactly what
Nestorius taught?  Who cares?  There are only two things that we
know for certain about it.  The first is that Nestorius, as a
heretic, taught something quite opposite to the teaching of
Arius, the heretic who came before him, and something quite
useless to James Turnbull, the heretic who comes after.  I defy
you to go back to the Free-thinkers of the past and find any
habitation for yourself at all.  I defy you to read Godwin or
Shelley or the deists of the eighteenth century of the
nature-worshipping humanists of the Renaissance, without
discovering that you differ from them twice as much as you differ
from the Pope.  You are a nineteenth-century sceptic, and you are
always telling me that I ignore the cruelty of nature.  If you had
been an eighteenth-century sceptic you would have told me that I
ignore the kindness and benevolence of nature.  You are an
atheist, and you praise the deists of the eighteenth century.
Read them instead of praising them, and you will find that their
whole universe stands or falls with the deity.  You are a
materialist, and you think Bruno a scientific hero.  See what he
said and you will think him an insane mystic.  No, the great
Free-thinker, with his genuine ability and honesty, does not in
practice destroy Christianity.  What he does destroy is the
Free-thinker who went before.  Free-thought may be suggestive, it
may be inspiriting, it may have as much as you please of the
merits that come from vivacity and variety.  But there is one
thing Free-thought can never be by any possibility--Free-thought
can never be progressive.  It can never be progressive because it
will accept nothing from the past; it begins every time again
from the beginning; and it goes every time in a different
direction.  All the rational philosophers have gone along
different roads, so it is impossible to say which has gone
farthest.  Who can discuss whether Emerson was a better optimist
than Schopenhauer was pessimist?  It is like asking if this corn
is as yellow as that hill is steep.  No; there are only two things
that really progress; and they both accept accumulations of
authority.  They may be progressing uphill and down; they may be
growing steadily better or steadily worse; but they have steadily
increased in certain definable matters; they have steadily
advanced in a certain definable direction; they are the only two
things, it seems, that ever _can_ progress.  The first is strictly
physical science.  The second is the Catholic Church."

"Physical science and the Catholic Church!" said Turnbull
sarcastically; "and no doubt the first owes a great deal to the
second."

"If you pressed that point I might reply that it was very
probable," answered MacIan calmly.  "I often fancy that your
historical generalizations rest frequently on random instances; I
should not be surprised if your vague notions of the Church as
the persecutor of science was a generalization from Galileo.  I
should not be at all surprised if, when you counted the
scientific investigations and discoveries since the fall of Rome,
you found that a great mass of them had been made by monks.  But
the matter is irrelevant to my meaning.  I say that if you want an
example of anything which has progressed in the moral world by
the same method as science in the material world, by continually
adding to without unsettling what was there before, then I say
that there _is_ only one example of it.  And that is Us."

"With this enormous difference," said Turnbull, "that however
elaborate be the calculations of physical science, their net
result can be tested.  Granted that it took millions of books I
never read and millions of men I never heard of to discover the
electric light.  Still I can see the electric light.  But I cannot
see the supreme virtue which is the result of all your theologies
and sacraments."

"Catholic virtue is often invisible because it is the normal,"
answered MacIan.  "Christianity is always out of fashion because
it is always sane; and all fashions are mild insanities.  When
Italy is mad on art the Church seems too Puritanical; when
England is mad on Puritanism the Church seems too artistic.  When
you quarrel with us now you class us with kingship and despotism;
but when you quarrelled with us first it was because we would not
accept the divine despotism of Henry VIII.  The Church always
seems to be behind the times, when it is really beyond the times;
it is waiting till the last fad shall have seen its last summer.
It keeps the key of a permanent virtue."

"Oh, I have heard all that!" said Turnbull with genial contempt.
"I have heard that Christianity keeps the key of virtue, and that
if you read Tom Paine you will cut your throat at Monte Carlo.  It
is such rubbish that I am not even angry at it.  You say that
Christianity is the prop of morals; but what more do you do?  When
a doctor attends you and could poison you with a pinch of salt,
do you ask whether he is a Christian?  You ask whether he is a
gentleman, whether he is an M.D.--anything but that.  When a
soldier enlists to die for his country or disgrace it, do you ask
whether he is a Christian?  You are more likely to ask whether he
is Oxford or Cambridge at the boat race.  If you think your creed
essential to morals why do you not make it a test for these
things?"

"We once did make it a test for these things," said MacIan
smiling, "and then you told us that we were imposing by force a
faith unsupported by argument.  It seems rather hard that having
first been told that our creed must be false because we did use
tests, we should now be told that it must be false because we
don't.  But I notice that most anti-Christian arguments are in the
same inconsistent style."

"That is all very well as a debating-club answer," replied
Turnbull good-humouredly, "but the question still remains: Why
don't you confine yourself more to Christians if Christians are
the only really good men?"

"Who talked of such folly?" asked MacIan disdainfully.  "Do you
suppose that the Catholic Church ever held that Christians were
the only good men?  Why, the Catholics of the Catholic Middle Ages
talked about the virtues of all the virtuous Pagans until
humanity was sick of the subject.  No, if you really want to know
what we mean when we say that Christianity has a special power of
virtue, I will tell you.  The Church is the only thing on earth
that can perpetuate a type of virtue and make it something more
than a fashion.  The thing is so plain and historical that I
hardly think you will ever deny it.  You cannot deny that it is
perfectly possible that tomorrow morning, in Ireland or in Italy,
there might appear a man not only as good but good in exactly the
same way as St. Francis of Assisi.  Very well, now take the other
types of human virtue; many of them splendid.  The English
gentleman of Elizabeth was chivalrous and idealistic.  But can you
stand still here in this meadow and _be_ an English gentleman of
Elizabeth?  The austere republican of the eighteenth century, with
his stern patriotism and his simple life, was a fine fellow.  But
have you ever seen him? have you ever seen an austere republican?
Only a hundred years have passed and that volcano of
revolutionary truth and valour is as cold as the mountains of the
moon.  And so it is and so it will be with the ethics which are
buzzing down Fleet Street at this instant as I speak.  What phrase
would inspire the London clerk or workman just now?  Perhaps that
he is a son of the British Empire on which the sun never sets;
perhaps that he is a prop of his Trades Union, or a
class-conscious proletarian something or other; perhaps merely
that he is a gentleman when he obviously is not.  Those names and
notions are all honourable; but how long will they last?  Empires
break; industrial conditions change; the suburbs will not last
for ever.  What will remain?  I will tell you.  The Catholic Saint
will remain."

"And suppose I don't like him?" said Turnbull.

"On my theory the question is rather whether he will like you: or
more probably whether he will ever have heard of you.  But I grant
the reasonableness of your query.  You have a right, if you speak
as the ordinary man, to ask if you will like the saint.  But as
the ordinary man you do like him.  You revel in him.  If you
dislike him it is not because you are a nice ordinary man, but
because you are (if you will excuse me) a sophisticated prig of a
Fleet Street editor.  That is just the funny part of it.  The human
race has always admired the Catholic virtues, however little it
can practise them; and oddly enough it has admired most those of
them that the modern world most sharply disputes.  You complain of
Catholicism for setting up an ideal of virginity; it did nothing
of the kind.  The whole human race set up an ideal of virginity;
the Greeks in Athene, the Romans in the Vestal fire, set up an
ideal of virginity.  What then is your real quarrel with
Catholicism?  Your quarrel can only be, your quarrel really only
is, that Catholicism has _achieved_ an ideal of virginity; that
it is no longer a mere piece of floating poetry.  But if you, and
a few feverish men, in top hats, running about in a street in
London, choose to differ as to the ideal itself, not only from
the Church, but from the Parthenon whose name means virginity,
from the Roman Empire which went outwards from the virgin flame,
from the whole legend and tradition of Europe, from the lion who
will not touch virgins, from the unicorn who respects them, and
who make up together the bearers of your own national shield,
from the most living and lawless of your own poets, from
Massinger, who wrote the _Virgin Martyr_, from Shakespeare, who
wrote _Measure for Measure_--if you in Fleet Street differ from
all this human experience, does it never strike you that it may
be Fleet Street that is wrong?"

"No," answered Turnbull; "I trust that I am sufficiently
fair-minded to canvass and consider the idea; but having
considered it, I think Fleet Street is right, yes--even if the
Parthenon is wrong.  I think that as the world goes on new
psychological atmospheres are generated, and in these atmospheres
it is possible to find delicacies and combinations which in other
times would have to be represented by some ruder symbol.  Every
man feels the need of some element of purity in sex; perhaps they
can only typify purity as the absence of sex.  You will laugh if I
suggest that we may have made in Fleet Street an atmosphere in
which a man can be so passionate as Sir Lancelot and as pure as
Sir Galahad.  But, after all, we have in the modern world erected
many such atmospheres.  We have, for instance, a new and
imaginative appreciation of children."

"Quite so," replied MacIan with a singular smile.  "It has been
very well put by one of the brightest of your young authors, who
said: 'Unless you become as little children ye shall in no wise
enter the kingdom of heaven.'  But you are quite right; there is a
modern worship of children.  And what, I ask you, is this modern
worship of children?  What, in the name of all the angels and
devils, is it except a worship of virginity?  Why should anyone
worship a thing merely because it is small or immature?  No; you
have tried to escape from this thing, and the very thing you
point to as the goal of your escape is only the thing again.  Am
I wrong in saying that these things seem to be eternal?"

And it was with these words that they came in sight of the great
plains.  They went a little way in silence, and then James
Turnbull said suddenly, "But I _cannot_ believe in the thing."
MacIan answered nothing to the speech; perhaps it is
unanswerable.  And indeed they scarcely spoke another word to
each other all that day.



IX. THE STRANGE LADY

Moonrise with a great and growing moon opened over all those
flats, making them seem flatter and larger than they were,
turning them to a lake of blue light.  The two companions trudged
across the moonlit plain for half an hour in full silence.  Then
MacIan stopped suddenly and planted his sword-point in the ground
like one who plants his tent-pole for the night.  Leaving it
standing there, he clutched his black-haired skull with his great
claws of hands, as was his custom when forcing the pace of his
brain.  Then his hands dropped again and he spoke.

"I'm sure you're thinking the same as I am," he said; "how long
are we to be on this damned seesaw?"

The other did not answer, but his silence seemed somehow solid as
assent; and MacIan went on conversationally.  Neither noticed that
both had instinctively stood still before the sign of the fixed
and standing sword.

"It is hard to guess what God means in this business.  But he
means something--or the other thing, or both.  Whenever we have
tried to fight each other something has stopped us.  Whenever we
have tried to be reconciled to each other, something has stopped
us again.  By the run of our luck we have never had time to be
either friends or enemies.  Something always jumped out of the
bushes."

Turnbull nodded gravely and glanced round at the huge and
hedgeless meadow which fell away towards the horizon into a
glimmering high road.

"Nothing will jump out of bushes here anyhow," he said.

"That is what I meant," said MacIan, and stared steadily at the
heavy hilt of his standing sword, which in the slight wind swayed
on its tempered steel like some huge thistle on its stalk.

"That is what I meant; we are quite alone here.  I have not heard
a horse-hoof or a footstep or the hoot of a train for miles.  So I
think we might stop here and ask for a miracle."

"Oh! might we?" said the atheistic editor with a sort of gusto of
disgust.

"I beg your pardon," said MacIan, meekly.  "I forgot your
prejudices."  He eyed the wind-swung sword-hilt in sad meditation
and resumed: "What I mean is, we might find out in this quiet
place whether there really is any fate or any commandment against
our enterprise.  I will engage on my side, like Elijah, to accept
a test from heaven.  Turnbull, let us draw swords here in this
moonlight and this monstrous solitude.  And if here in this
moonlight and solitude there happens anything to interrupt us--if
it be lightning striking our sword-blades or a rabbit running
under our legs--I will take it as a sign from God and we will
shake hands for ever."

Turnbull's mouth twitched in angry humour under his red
moustache.  He said: "I will wait for signs from God until I have
any signs of His existence; but God--or Fate--forbid that a man
of scientific culture should refuse any kind of experiment."

"Very well, then," said MacIan, shortly.  "We are more quiet here
than anywhere else; let us engage."  And he plucked his
sword-point out of the turf.

Turnbull regarded him for a second and a half with a baffling
visage almost black against the moonrise; then his hand made a
sharp movement to his hip and his sword shone in the moon.

As old chess-players open every game with established gambits,
they opened with a thrust and parry, orthodox and even frankly
ineffectual.  But in MacIan's soul more formless storms were
gathering, and he made a lunge or two so savage as first to
surprise and then to enrage his opponent.  Turnbull ground his
teeth, kept his temper, and waiting for the third lunge, and the
worst, had almost spitted the lunger when a shrill, small cry
came from behind him, a cry such as is not made by any of the
beasts that perish.

Turnbull must have been more superstitious than he knew, for he
stopped in the act of going forward.  MacIan was brazenly
superstitious, and he dropped his sword.  After all, he had
challenged the universe to send an interruption; and this was an
interruption, whatever else it was.  An instant afterwards the
sharp, weak cry was repeated.  This time it was certain that it
was human and that it was female.

MacIan stood rolling those great blue Gaelic eyes that contrasted
with his dark hair.  "It is the voice of God," he said again and
again.

"God hasn't got much of a voice," said Turnbull, who snatched at
every chance of cheap profanity.  "As a matter of fact, MacIan, it
isn't the voice of God, but it's something a jolly sight more
important--it is the voice of man--or rather of woman.  So I think
we'd better scoot in its direction."

MacIan snatched up his fallen weapon without a word, and the two
raced away towards that part of the distant road from which the
cry was now constantly renewed.

They had to run over a curve of country that looked smooth but
was very rough; a neglected field which they soon found to be
full of the tallest grasses and the deepest rabbit-holes.
Moreover, that great curve of the countryside which looked so
slow and gentle when you glanced over it, proved to be highly
precipitous when you scampered over it; and Turnbull was twice
nearly flung on his face.  MacIan, though much heavier, avoided
such an overthrow only by having the quick and incalculable feet
of the mountaineer; but both of them may be said to have leapt
off a low cliff when they leapt into the road.

The moonlight lay on the white road with a more naked and
electric glare than on the grey-green upland, and though the
scene which it revealed was complicated, it was not difficult to
get its first features at a glance.

A small but very neat black-and-yellow motor-car was standing
stolidly, slightly to the left of the road.  A somewhat larger
light-green motor-car was tipped half-way into a ditch on the
same side, and four flushed and staggering men in evening dress
were tipped out of it.  Three of them were standing about the
road, giving their opinions to the moon with vague but echoing
violence.  The fourth, however, had already advanced on the
chauffeur of the black-and-yellow car, and was threatening him
with a stick.  The chauffeur had risen to defend himself.  By
his side sat a young lady.

She was sitting bolt upright, a slender and rigid figure gripping
the sides of her seat, and her first few cries had ceased.  She
was clad in close-fitting dark costume, a mass of warm brown hair
went out in two wings or waves on each side of her forehead; and
even at that distance it could be seen that her profile was of
the aquiline and eager sort, like a young falcon hardly free of
the nest.

Turnbull had concealed in him somewhere a fund of common sense
and knowledge of the world of which he himself and his best
friends were hardly aware.  He was one of those who take in much
of the shows of things absent-mindedly, and in an irrelevant
reverie.  As he stood at the door of his editorial shop on Ludgate
Hill and meditated on the non-existence of God, he silently
absorbed a good deal of varied knowledge about the existence of
men.  He had come to know types by instinct and dilemmas with a
glance; he saw the crux of the situation in the road, and what he
saw made him redouble his pace.

He knew that the men were rich; he knew that they were drunk; and
he knew, what was worst of all, that they were fundamentally
frightened.  And he knew this also, that no common ruffian (such
as attacks ladies in novels) is ever so savage and ruthless as a
coarse kind of gentleman when he is really alarmed.  The reason is
not recondite; it is simply because the police-court is not such
a menacing novelty to the poor ruffian as it is to the rich.  When
they came within hail and heard the voices, they confirmed all
Turnbull's anticipations.  The man in the middle of the road was
shouting in a hoarse and groggy voice that the chauffeur had
smashed their car on purpose; that they must get to the Cri that
evening, and that he would jolly well have to take them there.
The chauffeur had mildly objected that he was driving a lady.
"Oh! we'll take care of the lady," said the red-faced young man,
and went off into gurgling and almost senile laughter.

By the time the two champions came up, things had grown more
serious.  The intoxication of the man talking to the chauffeur had
taken one of its perverse and catlike jumps into mere screaming
spite and rage.  He lifted his stick and struck at the chauffeur,
who caught hold of it, and the drunkard fell backwards, dragging
him out of his seat on the car.  Another of the rowdies rushed
forward booing in idiot excitement, fell over the chauffeur, and,
either by accident or design, kicked him as he lay.  The drunkard
got to his feet again; but the chauffeur did not.

The man who had kicked kept a kind of half-witted conscience or
cowardice, for he stood staring at the senseless body and
murmuring words of inconsequent self-justification, making
gestures with his hands as if he were arguing with somebody.  But
the other three, with a mere whoop and howl of victory, were
boarding the car on three sides at once.  It was exactly at this
moment that Turnbull fell among them like one fallen from the
sky.  He tore one of the climbers backward by the collar, and with
a hearty push sent him staggering over into the ditch upon his
nose.  One of the remaining two, who was too far gone to notice
anything, continued to clamber ineffectually over the high back
of the car, kicking and pouring forth a rivulet of soliloquy.  But
the other dropped at the interruption, turned upon Turnbull and
began a battering bout of fisticuffs.  At the same moment the man
crawled out of the ditch in a masquerade of mud and rushed at his
old enemy from behind.  The whole had not taken a second; and an
instant after MacIan was in the midst of them.

Turnbull had tossed away his sheathed sword, greatly preferring
his hands, except in the avowed etiquette of the duel; for he had
learnt to use his hands in the old street-battles of Bradlaugh.
But to MacIan the sword even sheathed was a more natural weapon,
and he laid about him on all sides with it as with a stick.  The
man who had the walking-stick found his blows parried with
promptitude; and a second after, to his great astonishment, found
his own stick fly up in the air as by a conjuring trick, with a
turn of the swordsman's wrist.  Another of the revellers picked
the stick out of the ditch and ran in upon MacIan, calling to his
companion to assist him.

"I haven't got a stick," grumbled the disarmed man, and looked
vaguely about the ditch.

"Perhaps," said MacIan, politely, "you would like this one."  With
the word the drunkard found his hand that had grasped the stick
suddenly twisted and empty; and the stick lay at the feet of his
companion on the other side of the road.  MacIan felt a faint stir
behind him; the girl had risen to her feet and was leaning
forward to stare at the fighters.  Turnbull was still engaged in
countering and pommelling with the third young man. The fourth
young man was still engaged with himself, kicking his legs in
helpless rotation on the back of the car and talking with
melodious rationality.

At length Turnbull's opponent began to back before the battery of
his heavy hands, still fighting, for he was the soberest and
boldest of the four.  If these are annals of military glory, it is
due to him to say that he need not have abandoned the conflict;
only that as he backed to the edge of the ditch his foot caught
in a loop of grass and he went over in a flat and comfortable
position from which it took him a considerable time to rise.  By
the time he had risen, Turnbull had come to the rescue of MacIan,
who was at bay but belabouring his two enemies handsomely.  The
sight of the liberated reserve was to them like that of Blucher
at Waterloo; the two set off at a sullen trot down the road,
leaving even the walking-stick lying behind them in the
moonlight.  MacIan plucked the struggling and aspiring idiot off
the back of the car like a stray cat, and left him swaying
unsteadily in the moon.  Then he approached the front part of the
car in a somewhat embarrassed manner and pulled off his cap.

For some solid seconds the lady and he merely looked at each
other, and MacIan had an irrational feeling of being in a picture
hung on a wall.  That is, he was motionless, even lifeless, and
yet staringly significant, like a picture.  The white moonlight on
the road, when he was not looking at it, gave him a vision of the
road being white with snow.  The motor-car, when he was not
looking at it, gave him a rude impression of a captured coach in
the old days of highwaymen.  And he whose whole soul was with the
swords and stately manners of the eighteenth century, he who was
a Jacobite risen from the dead, had an overwhelming sense of
being once more in the picture, when he had so long been out of
the picture.

In that short and strong silence he absorbed the lady from head
to foot.  He had never really looked at a human being before in
his life.  He saw her face and hair first, then that she had long
suede gloves; then that there was a fur cap at the back of her
brown hair.  He might, perhaps, be excused for this hungry
attention.  He had prayed that some sign might come from heaven;
and after an almost savage scrutiny he came to the conclusion
that his one did.  The lady's instantaneous arrest of speech
might need more explaining; but she may well have been stunned
with the squalid attack and the abrupt rescue.  Yet it was she
who remembered herself first and suddenly called out with
self-accusing horror:

"Oh, that poor, poor man!"

They both swung round abruptly and saw that Turnbull, with his
recovered sword under his arm-pit, was already lifting the fallen
chauffeur into the car.  He was only stunned and was slowly
awakening, feebly waving his left arm.

The lady in long gloves and the fur cap leapt out and ran rapidly
towards them, only to be reassured by Turnbull, who (unlike many
of his school) really knew a little science when he invoked it to
redeem the world.  "He's all right," said he; "he's quite safe.
But I'm afraid he won't be able to drive the car for half an hour
or so."

"I can drive the car," said the young woman in the fur cap with
stony practicability.

"Oh, in that case," began MacIan, uneasily; and that paralysing
shyness which is a part of romance induced him to make a backward
movement as if leaving her to herself.  But Turnbull was more
rational than he, being more indifferent.

"I don't think you ought to drive home alone, ma'am," he said,
gruffly.  "There seem to be a lot of rowdy parties along this
road, and the man will be no use for an hour.  If you will tell
us where you are going, we will see you safely there and say good
night."

The young lady exhibited all the abrupt disturbance of a person
who is not commonly disturbed.  She said almost sharply and yet
with evident sincerity: "Of course I am awfully grateful to you
for all you've done--and there's plenty of room if you'll come
in."

Turnbull, with the complete innocence of an absolutely sound
motive, immediately jumped into the car; but the girl cast an eye
at MacIan, who stood in the road for an instant as if rooted like
a tree.  Then he also tumbled his long legs into the tonneau,
having that sense of degradedly diving into heaven which so many
have known in so many human houses when they consented to stop to
tea or were allowed to stop to supper.  The slowly reviving
chauffeur was set in the back seat; Turnbull and MacIan had
fallen into the middle one; the lady with a steely coolness had
taken the driver's seat and all the handles of that headlong
machine.  A moment afterwards the engine started, with a throb and
leap unfamiliar to Turnbull, who had only once been in a motor
during a general election, and utterly unknown to MacIan, who in
his present mood thought it was the end of the world.  Almost at
the same instant that the car plucked itself out of the mud and
whipped away up the road, the man who had been flung into the
ditch rose waveringly to his feet.  When he saw the car escaping
he ran after it and shouted something which, owing to the
increasing distance, could not be heard.  It is awful to reflect
that, if his remark was valuable, it is quite lost to the world.

The car shot on up and down the shining moonlit lanes, and there
was no sound in it except the occasional click or catch of its
machinery; for through some cause or other no soul inside it
could think of a word to say.  The lady symbolized her feelings,
whatever they were, by urging the machine faster and faster until
scattered woodlands went by them in one black blotch and heavy
hills and valleys seemed to ripple under the wheels like mere
waves.  A little while afterwards this mood seemed to slacken and
she fell into a more ordinary pace; but still she did not speak.
Turnbull, who kept a more common and sensible view of the case
than anyone else, made some remark about the moonlight; but
something indescribable made him also relapse into silence.

All this time MacIan had been in a sort of monstrous delirium,
like some fabulous hero snatched up into the moon.  The difference
between this experience and common experiences was analogous to
that between waking life and a dream.  Yet he did not feel in the
least as if he were dreaming; rather the other way; as waking was
more actual than dreaming, so this seemed by another degree more
actual than waking itself.  But it was another life altogether,
like a cosmos with a new dimension.

He felt he had been hurled into some new incarnation: into the
midst of new relations, wrongs and rights, with towering
responsibilities and almost tragic joys which he had as yet had
no time to examine.  Heaven had not merely sent him a message;
Heaven itself had opened around him and given him an hour of its
own ancient and star-shattering energy.  He had never felt so much
alive before; and yet he was like a man in a trance.  And if you
had asked him on what his throbbing happiness hung, he could only
have told you that it hung on four or five visible facts, as a
curtain hangs on four of five fixed nails.  The fact that the lady
had a little fur at her throat; the fact that the curve of her
cheek was a low and lean curve and that the moonlight caught the
height of her cheek-bone; the fact that her hands were small but
heavily gloved as they gripped the steering-wheel; the fact that
a white witch light was on the road; the fact that the brisk
breeze of their passage stirred and fluttered a little not only
the brown hair of her head but the black fur on her cap.  All
these facts were to him certain and incredible, like sacraments.

When they had driven half a mile farther, a big shadow was flung
across the path, followed by its bulky owner, who eyed the car
critically but let it pass.  The silver moonlight picked out a
piece or two of pewter ornament on his blue uniform; and as they
went by they knew it was a sergeant of police.  Three hundred
yards farther on another policeman stepped out into the road as
if to stop them, then seemed to doubt his own authority and
stepped back again.  The girl was a daughter of the rich; and this
police suspicion (under which all the poor live day and night)
stung her for the first time into speech.

"What can they mean?" she cried out in a kind of temper; "this
car's going like a snail."

There was a short silence, and then Turnbull said: "It is
certainly very odd, you are driving quietly enough."

"You are driving nobly," said MacIan, and his words (which had no
meaning whatever) sounded hoarse and ungainly even in his own
ears.

They passed the next mile and a half swiftly and smoothly; yet
among the many things which they passed in the course of it was a
clump of eager policemen standing at a cross-road.  As they
passed, one of the policemen shouted something to the others; but
nothing else happened.  Eight hundred yards farther on, Turnbull
stood up suddenly in the swaying car.

"My God, MacIan!" he called out, showing his first emotion of
that night.  "I don't believe it's the pace; it couldn't be the
pace. I believe it's us."

MacIan sat motionless for a few moments and then turned up at his
companion a face that was as white as the moon above it.

"You may be right," he said at last; "if you are, I must tell
her."

"I will tell the lady if you like," said Turnbull, with his
unconquered good temper.

"You!" said MacIan, with a sort of sincere and instinctive
astonishment.  "Why should you--no, I must tell her, of
course----"

And he leant forward and spoke to the lady in the fur cap.

"I am afraid, madam, that we may have got you into some trouble,"
he said, and even as he said it it sounded wrong, like everything
he said to this particular person in the long gloves.  "The fact
is," he resumed, desperately, "the fact is, we are being chased
by the police."  Then the last flattening hammer fell upon poor
Evan's embarrassment; for the fluffy brown head with the furry
black cap did not turn by a section of the compass.

"We are chased by the police," repeated MacIan, vigorously; then
he added, as if beginning an explanation, "You see, I am a
Catholic."

The wind whipped back a curl of the brown hair so as to
necessitate a new theory of aesthetics touching the line of the
cheek-bone; but the head did not turn.

"You see," began MacIan, again blunderingly, "this gentleman
wrote in his newspaper that Our Lady was a common woman, a bad
woman, and so we agreed to fight; and we were fighting quite a
little time ago--but that was before we saw you."

The young lady driving her car had half turned her face to
listen; and it was not a reverent or a patient face that she
showed him.  Her Norman nose was tilted a trifle too high upon
the slim stalk of her neck and body.

When MacIan saw that arrogant and uplifted profile pencilled
plainly against the moonshine, he accepted an ultimate defeat.
He had expected the angels to despise him if he were wrong, but
not to despise him so much as this.

"You see," said the stumbling spokesman, "I was angry with him
when he insulted the Mother of God, and I asked him to fight a
duel with me; but the police are all trying to stop it."

Nothing seemed to waver or flicker in the fair young falcon
profile; and it only opened its lips to say, after a silence: "I
thought people in our time were supposed to respect each other's
religion."

Under the shadow of that arrogant face MacIan could only fall
back on the obvious answer: "But what about a man's irreligion?"
The face only answered: "Well, you ought to be more broadminded."

If anyone else in the world had said the words, MacIan would have
snorted with his equine neigh of scorn.  But in this case he
seemed knocked down by a superior simplicity, as if his eccentric
attitude were rebuked by the innocence of a child.  He could not
dissociate anything that this woman said or did or wore from an
idea of spiritual rarity and virtue.  Like most others under the
same elemental passion, his soul was at present soaked in ethics.
He could have applied moral terms to the material objects of her
environment.  If someone had spoken of "her generous ribbon" or
"her chivalrous gloves" or "her merciful shoe-buckle," it would
not have seemed to him nonsense.

He was silent, and the girl went on in a lower key as if she were
momentarily softened and a little saddened also.  "It won't do,
you know," she said; "you can't find out the truth in that way.
There are such heaps of churches and people thinking different
things nowadays, and they all think they are right.  My uncle was
a Swedenborgian."

MacIan sat with bowed head, listening hungrily to her voice but
hardly to her words, and seeing his great world drama grow
smaller and smaller before his eyes till it was no bigger than a
child's toy theatre.

"The time's gone by for all that," she went on; "you can't find
out the real thing like that--if there is really anything to
find----" and she sighed rather drearily; for, like many of the
women of our wealthy class, she was old and broken in thought,
though young and clean enough in her emotions.

"Our object," said Turnbull, shortly, "is to make an effective
demonstration"; and after that word, MacIan looked at his vision
again and found it smaller than ever.

"It would be in the newspapers, of course," said the girl.
"People read the newspapers, but they don't believe them, or
anything else, I think."  And she sighed again.

She drove in silence a third of a mile before she added, as if
completing the sentence: "Anyhow, the whole thing's quite
absurd."

"I don't think," began Turnbull, "that you quite realize----
Hullo! hullo--hullo--what's this?"

The amateur chauffeur had been forced to bring the car to a
staggering stoppage, for a file of fat, blue policemen made a
wall across the way.  A sergeant came to the side and touched his
peaked cap to the lady.

"Beg your pardon, miss," he said with some embarrassment, for he
knew her for a daughter of a dominant house, "but we have reason
to believe that the gentlemen in your car are----" and he
hesitated for a polite phrase.

"I am Evan MacIan," said that gentleman, and stood up in a sort
of gloomy pomp, not wholly without a touch of the sulks of a
schoolboy.

"Yes, we will get out, sergeant," said Turnbull, more easily; "my
name is James Turnbull.  We must not incommode the lady."

"What are you taking them up for?" asked the young woman, looking
straight in front of her along the road.

"It's under the new act," said the sergeant, almost
apologetically.  "Incurable disturbers of the peace."

"What will happen to them?" she asked, with the same frigid
clearness.

"Westgate Adult Reformatory," he replied, briefly.

"Until when?"

"Until they are cured," said the official.

"Very well, sergeant," said the young lady, with a sort of tired
common sense.  "I am sure I don't want to protect criminals or go
against the law; but I must tell you that these gentlemen have
done me a considerable service; you won't mind drawing your men a
little farther off while I say good night to them.  Men like that
always misunderstand."

The sergeant was profoundly disquieted from the beginning at the
mere idea of arresting anyone in the company of a great lady; to
refuse one of her minor requests was quite beyond his courage.
The police fell back to a few yards behind the car.  Turnbull took
up the two swords that were their only luggage; the swords that,
after so many half duels, they were now to surrender at last.
MacIan, the blood thundering in his brain at the thought of that
instant of farewell, bent over, fumbled at the handle and flung
open the door to get out.

But he did not get out.  He did not get out, because it is
dangerous to jump out of a car when it is going at full speed.
And the car was going at full speed, because the young lady,
without turning her head or so much as saying a syllable, had
driven down a handle that made the machine plunge forward like a
buffalo and then fly over the landscape like a greyhound.  The
police made one rush to follow, and then dropped so grotesque and
hopeless a chase.  Away in the vanishing distance they could see
the sergeant furiously making notes.

The open door, still left loose on its hinges, swung and banged
quite crazily as they went whizzing up one road and down another.
Nor did MacIan sit down; he stood up stunned and yet staring, as
he would have stood up at the trumpet of the Last Day.  A black
dot in the distance sprang up a tall black forest, swallowed them
and spat them out again at the other end.  A railway bridge grew
larger and larger till it leapt upon their backs bellowing, and
was in its turn left behind.  Avenues of poplars on both sides of
the road chased each other like the figures in a zoetrope.  Now
and then with a shock and rattle they went through sleeping
moonlit villages, which must have stirred an instant in their
sleep as at the passing of a fugitive earthquake.  Sometimes in an
outlying house a light in one erratic, unexpected window would
give them a nameless hint of the hundred human secrets which they
left behind them with their dust.  Sometimes even a slouching
rustic would be afoot on the road and would look after them, as
after a flying phantom.  But still MacIan stood up staring at
earth and heaven; and still the door he had flung open flapped
loose like a flag.  Turnbull, after a few minutes of dumb
amazement, had yielded to the healthiest element in his nature
and gone off into uncontrollable fits of laughter.  The girl had
not stirred an inch.

After another half mile that seemed a mere flash, Turnbull leant
over and locked the door.  Evan staggered at last into his seat
and hid his throbbing head in his hands; and still the car flew
on and its driver sat inflexible and silent.  The moon had already
gone down, and the whole darkness was faintly troubled with
twilight and the first movement of beasts and fowls.  It was that
mysterious moment when light is coming as if it were something
unknown whose nature one could not guess--a mere alteration in
everything.  They looked at the sky and it seemed as dark as ever;
then they saw the black shape of a tower or tree against it and
knew that it was already grey.  Save that they were driving
southward and had certainly passed the longitude of London, they
knew nothing of their direction; but Turnbull, who had spent a
year on the Hampshire coast in his youth, began to recognize the
unmistakable but quite indescribable villages of the English
south.  Then a white witch fire began to burn between the black
stems of the fir-trees; and, like so many things in nature,
though not in books on evolution, the daybreak, when it did come,
came much quicker than one would think.  The gloomy heavens were
ripped up and rolled away like a scroll, revealing splendours, as
the car went roaring up the curve of a great hill; and above them
and black against the broadening light, there stood one of those
crouching and fantastic trees that are first signals of the sea.



X. THE SWORDS REJOINED

As they came over the hill and down on the other side of it, it
is not too much to say that the whole universe of God opened over
them and under them, like a thing unfolding to five times its
size.  Almost under their feet opened the enormous sea, at the
bottom of a steep valley which fell down into a bay; and the sea
under their feet blazed at them almost as lustrous and almost as
empty as the sky.  The sunrise opened above them like some cosmic
explosion, shining and shattering and yet silent; as if the world
were blown to pieces without a sound.  Round the rays of the
victorious sun swept a sort of rainbow of confused and conquered
colours--brown and blue and green and flaming rose-colour; as
though gold were driving before it all the colours of the world.
The lines of the landscape down which they sped, were the simple,
strict, yet swerving, lines of a rushing river; so that it was
almost as if they were being sucked down in a huge still
whirlpool.  Turnbull had some such feeling, for he spoke for the
first time for many hours.

"If we go down at this rate we shall be over the sea cliff," he
said.

"How glorious!" said MacIan.

When, however, they had come into the wide hollow at the bottom
of that landslide, the car took a calm and graceful curve along
the side of the sea, melted into the fringe of a few trees, and
quietly, yet astonishingly, stopped.  A belated light was burning
in the broad morning in the window of a sort of lodge- or
gate-keepers' cottage; and the girl stood up in the car and
turned her splendid face to the sun.

Evan seemed startled by the stillness, like one who had been born
amid sound and speed.  He wavered on his long legs as he stood up;
he pulled himself together, and the only consequence was that he
trembled from head to foot.  Turnbull had already opened the door
on his side and jumped out.

The moment he had done so the strange young woman had one more
mad movement, and deliberately drove the car a few yards farther.
Then she got out with an almost cruel coolness and began pulling
off her long gloves and almost whistling.

"You can leave me here," she said, quite casually, as if they had
met five minutes before.  "That is the lodge of my father's place.
Please come in, if you like--but I understood that you had some
business."

Evan looked at that lifted face and found it merely lovely; he
was far too much of a fool to see that it was working with a
final fatigue and that its austerity was agony.  He was even fool
enough to ask it a question.  "Why did you save us?" he said,
quite humbly.

The girl tore off one of her gloves, as if she were tearing off
her hand.  "Oh, I don't know," she said, bitterly.  "Now I come
to think of it, I can't imagine."

Evan's thoughts, that had been piled up to the morning star,
abruptly let him down with a crash into the very cellars of the
emotional universe.  He remained in a stunned silence for a long
time; and that, if he had only known, was the wisest thing that
he could possibly do at the moment.

Indeed, the silence and the sunrise had their healing effect, for
when the extraordinary lady spoke again, her tone was more
friendly and apologetic.  "I'm not really ungrateful," she said;
"it was very good of you to save me from those men."

"But why?" repeated the obstinate and dazed MacIan, "why did you
save us from the other men?  I mean the policemen?"

The girl's great brown eyes were lit up with a flash that was at
once final desperation and the loosening of some private and
passionate reserve.

"Oh, God knows!" she cried.  "God knows that if there is a God He
has turned His big back on everything.  God knows I have had no
pleasure in my life, though I am pretty and young and father has
plenty of money.  And then people come and tell me that I ought to
do things and I do them and it's all drivel.  They want you to do
work among the poor; which means reading Ruskin and feeling
self-righteous in the best room in a poor tenement.  Or to help
some cause or other, which always means bundling people out of
crooked houses, in which they've always lived, into straight
houses, in which they often die.  And all the time you have inside
only the horrid irony of your own empty head and empty heart.  I
am to give to the unfortunate, when my whole misfortune is that I
have nothing to give.  I am to teach, when I believe nothing at
all that I was taught.  I am to save the children from death, and
I am not even certain that I should not be better dead.  I suppose
if I actually saw a child drowning I should save it.  But that
would be from the same motive from which I have saved you, or
destroyed you, whichever it is that I have done."

"What was the motive?" asked Evan, in a low voice.

"My motive is too big for my mind," answered the girl.

Then, after a pause, as she stared with a rising colour at the
glittering sea, she said: "It can't be described, and yet I am
trying to describe it.  It seems to me not only that I am unhappy,
but that there is no way of being happy.  Father is not happy,
though he is a Member of Parliament----"  She paused a moment and
added with a ghost of a smile: "Nor Aunt Mabel, though a man from
India has told her the secret of all creeds.  But I may be wrong;
there may be a way out.  And for one stark, insane second, I felt
that, after all, you had got the way out and that was why the
world hated you.  You see, if there were a way out, it would be
sure to be something that looked very queer."

Evan put his hand to his forehead and began stumblingly: "Yes, I
suppose we do seem----"

"Oh, yes, you look queer enough," she said, with ringing
sincerity.  "You'll be all the better for a wash and brush up."

"You forget our business, madam," said Evan, in a shaking voice;
"we have no concern but to kill each other."

"Well, I shouldn't be killed looking like that if I were you,"
she replied, with inhuman honesty.

Evan stood and rolled his eyes in masculine bewilderment. Then
came the final change in this Proteus, and she put out both her
hands for an instant and said in a low tone on which he lived for
days and nights:

"Don't you understand that I did not dare to stop you?  What you
are doing is so mad that it may be quite true.  Somehow one can
never really manage to be an atheist."

Turnbull stood staring at the sea; but his shoulders showed that
he heard, and after one minute he turned his head.  But the girl
had only brushed Evan's hand with hers and had fled up the dark
alley by the lodge gate.

Evan stood rooted upon the road, literally like some heavy statue
hewn there in the age of the Druids.  It seemed impossible that he
should ever move.  Turnbull grew restless with this rigidity, and
at last, after calling his companion twice or thrice, went up and
clapped him impatiently on one of his big shoulders.  Evan winced
and leapt away from him with a repulsion which was not the hate
of an unclean thing nor the dread of a dangerous one, but was a
spasm of awe and separation from something from which he was now
sundered as by the sword of God.  He did not hate the atheist; it
is possible that he loved him.  But Turnbull was now something
more dreadful than an enemy: he was a thing sealed and devoted--a
thing now hopelessly doomed to be either a corpse or an
executioner.

"What is the matter with you?" asked Turnbull, with his hearty
hand still in the air; and yet he knew more about it than his
innocent action would allow.

"James," said Evan, speaking like one under strong bodily pain,
"I asked for God's answer and I have got it--got it in my vitals.
He knows how weak I am, and that I might forget the peril of the
faith, forget the face of Our Lady--yes, even with your blow upon
her cheek.  But the honour of this earth has just this about it,
that it can make a man's heart like iron.  I am from the Lords of
the Isles and I dare not be a mere deserter.  Therefore, God has
tied me by the chain of my worldly place and word, and there is
nothing but fighting now."

"I think I understand you," said Turnbull, "but you say
everything tail foremost."

"She wants us to do it," said Evan, in a voice crushed with
passion.  "She has hurt herself so that we might do it.  She has
left her good name and her good sleep and all her habits and
dignity flung away on the other side of England in the hope that
she may hear of us and that we have broken some hole into
heaven."

"I thought I knew what you mean," said Turnbull, biting his
beard; "it does seem as if we ought to do something after all she
has done this night."

"I never liked you so much before," said MacIan, in bitter
sorrow.

As he spoke, three solemn footmen came out of the lodge gate and
assembled to assist the chauffeur to his room.  The mere sight of
them made the two wanderers flee as from a too frightful
incongruity, and before they knew where they were, they were well
upon the grassy ledge of England that overlooks the Channel.  Evan
said suddenly: "Will they let me see her in heaven once in a
thousand ages?" and addressed the remark to the editor of _The
Atheist_, as on which he would be likely or qualified to answer.
But no answer came; a silence sank between the two.

Turnbull strode sturdily to the edge of the cliff and looked out,
his companion following, somewhat more shaken by his recent
agitation.

"If that's the view you take," said Turnbull, "and I don't say
you are wrong, I think I know where we shall be best off for the
business.  As it happens, I know this part of the south coast
pretty well.  And unless I am mistaken there's a way down the
cliff just here which will land us on a stretch of firm sand
where no one is likely to follow us."

The Highlander made a gesture of assent and came also almost to
the edge of the precipice.  The sunrise, which was broadening over
sea and shore, was one of those rare and splendid ones in which
there seems to be no mist or doubt, and nothing but a universal
clarification more and more complete.  All the colours were
transparent.  It seemed like a triumphant prophecy of some perfect
world where everything being innocent will be intelligible; a
world where even our bodies, so to speak, may be as of burning
glass.  Such a world is faintly though fiercely figured in the
coloured windows of Christian architecture.  The sea that lay
before them was like a pavement of emerald, bright and almost
brittle; the sky against which its strict horizon hung was almost
absolutely white, except that close to the sky line, like scarlet
braids on the hem of a garment, lay strings of flaky cloud of so
gleaming and gorgeous a red that they seemed cut out of some
strange blood-red celestial metal, of which the mere gold of this
earth is but a drab yellow imitation.

"The hand of Heaven is still pointing," muttered the man of
superstition to himself.  "And now it is a blood-red hand."

The cool voice of his companion cut in upon his monologue,
calling to him from a little farther along the cliff, to tell him
that he had found the ladder of descent.  It began as a steep and
somewhat greasy path, which then tumbled down twenty or thirty
feet in the form of a fall of rough stone steps.  After that,
there was a rather awkward drop on to a ledge of stone and then
the journey was undertaken easily and even elegantly by the
remains of an ornamental staircase, such as might have belonged
to some long-disused watering-place.  All the time that the two
travellers sank from stage to stage of this downward journey,
there closed over their heads living bridges and caverns of the
most varied foliage, all of which grew greener, redder, or more
golden, in the growing sunlight of the morning.  Life, too, of the
more moving sort rose at the sun on every side of them.  Birds
whirred and fluttered in the undergrowth, as if imprisoned in
green cages.  Other birds were shaken up in great clouds from the
tree-tops, as if they were blossoms detached and scattered up to
heaven.  Animals which Turnbull was too much of a Londoner and
MacIan too much of a Northerner to know, slipped by among the
tangle or ran pattering up the tree-trunks.  Both the men,
according to their several creeds, felt the full thunder of the
psalm of life as they had never heard it before; MacIan felt God
the Father, benignant in all His energies, and Turnbull that
ultimate anonymous energy, that _Natura Naturans_, which is the
whole theme of Lucretius.  It was down this clamorous ladder of
life that they went down to die.

They broke out upon a brown semicircle of sand, so free from
human imprint as to justify Turnbull's profession.  They strode
out upon it, stuck their swords in the sand, and had a pause too
important for speech.  Turnbull eyed the coast curiously for a
moment, like one awakening memories of childhood; then he said
abruptly, like a man remembering somebody's name: "But, of
course, we shall be better off still round the corner of Cragness
Point; nobody ever comes there at all."  And picking up his sword
again, he began striding towards a big bluff of the rocks which
stood out upon their left.  MacIan followed him round the corner
and found himself in what was certainly an even finer fencing
court, of flat, firm sand, enclosed on three sides by white walls
of rock, and on the fourth by the green wall of the advancing
sea.

"We are quite safe here," said Turnbull, and, to the other's
surprise, flung himself down, sitting on the brown beach.

"You see, I was brought up near here," he explained.  "I was sent
from Scotland to stop with my aunt.  It is highly probable that I
may die here.  Do you mind if I light a pipe?"

"Of course, do whatever you like," said MacIan, with a choking
voice, and he went and walked alone by himself along the wet,
glistening sands.

Ten minutes afterwards he came back again, white with his own
whirlwind of emotions; Turnbull was quite cheerful and was
knocking out the end of his pipe.

"You see, we have to do it," said MacIan. "She tied us to it."

"Of course, my dear fellow," said the other, and leapt up as
lightly as a monkey.

They took their places gravely in the very centre of the great
square of sand, as if they had thousands of spectators.  Before
saluting, MacIan, who, being a mystic, was one inch nearer to
Nature, cast his eye round the huge framework of their heroic
folly.  The three walls of rock all leant a little outward, though
at various angles; but this impression was exaggerated in the
direction of the incredible by the heavy load of living trees and
thickets which each wall wore on its top like a huge shock of
hair.  On all that luxurious crest of life the risen and
victorious sun was beating, burnishing it all like gold, and
every bird that rose with that sunrise caught a light like a star
upon it like the dove of the Holy Spirit.  Imaginative life had
never so much crowded upon MacIan.  He felt that he could write
whole books about the feelings of a single bird.  He felt that for
two centuries he would not tire of being a rabbit.  He was in the
Palace of Life, of which the very tapestries and curtains were
alive.  Then he recovered himself, and remembered his affairs.
Both men saluted, and iron rang upon iron.  It was exactly at the
same moment that he realized that his enemy's left ankle was
encircled with a ring of salt water that had crept up to his
feet.

"What is the matter?" said Turnbull, stopping an instant, for he
had grown used to every movement of his extraordinary
fellow-traveller's face.

MacIan glanced again at that silver anklet of sea-water and then
looked beyond at the next promontory round which a deep sea was
boiling and leaping.  Then he turned and looked back and saw heavy
foam being shaken up to heaven about the base of Cragness Point.

"The sea has cut us off," he said, curtly.

"I have noticed it," said Turnbull with equal sobriety.  "What
view do you take of the development?"

Evan threw away his weapon, and, as his custom was, imprisoned
his big head in his hands.  Then he let them fall and said: "Yes,
I know what it means; and I think it is the fairest thing.  It is
the finger of God--red as blood--still pointing.  But now it
points to two graves."

There was a space filled with the sound of the sea, and then
MacIan spoke again in a voice pathetically reasonable: "You see,
we both saved her--and she told us both to fight--and it would
not be just that either should fail and fall alone, while the
other----"

"You mean," said Turnbull, in a voice surprisingly soft and
gentle, "that there is something fine about fighting in a place
where even the conqueror must die?"

"Oh, you have got it right, you have got it right!" cried out
Evan, in an extraordinary childish ecstasy.  "Oh, I'm sure that
you really believe in God!"

Turnbull answered not a word, but only took up his fallen sword.

For the third time Evan MacIan looked at those three sides of
English cliff hung with their noisy load of life.  He had been
at a loss to understand the almost ironical magnificence of all
those teeming creatures and tropical colours and smells that
smoked happily to heaven.  But now he knew that he was in the
closed court of death and that all the gates were sealed.

He drank in the last green and the last red and the last gold,
those unique and indescribable things of God, as a man drains
good wine at the bottom of his glass.  Then he turned and saluted
his enemy once more, and the two stood up and fought till the
foam flowed over their knees.

Then MacIan stepped backward suddenly with a splash and held up
his hand.  "Turnbull!" he cried; "I can't help it--fair fighting
is more even than promises.  And this is not fair fighting."

"What the deuce do you mean?" asked the other, staring.

"I've only just thought of it," cried Evan, brokenly.  "We're very
well matched--it may go on a good time--the tide is coming up
fast--and I'm a foot and a half taller.  You'll be washed away
like seaweed before it's above my breeches.  I'll not fight foul
for all the girls and angels in the universe."

"Will you oblige me," said Turnbull, with staring grey eyes and a
voice of distinct and violent politeness; "will you oblige me by
jolly well minding your own business?  Just you stand up and
fight, and we'll see who will be washed away like seaweed.  You
wanted to finish this fight and you shall finish it, or I'll
denounce you as a coward to the whole of that assembled company."

Evan looked very doubtful and offered a somewhat wavering weapon;
but he was quickly brought back to his senses by his opponent's
sword-point, which shot past him, shaving his shoulder by a hair.
By this time the waves were well up Turnbull's thigh, and what
was worse, they were beginning to roll and break heavily around
them.

MacIan parried this first lunge perfectly, the next less
perfectly; the third in all human probability he would not have
parried at all; the Christian champion would have been pinned
like a butterfly, and the atheistic champion left to drown like a
rat, with such consolation as his view of the cosmos afforded
him.  But just as Turnbull launched his heaviest stroke, the sea,
in which he stood up to his hips, launched a yet heavier one.  A
wave breaking beyond the others smote him heavily like a hammer
of water.  One leg gave way, he was swung round and sucked into
the retreating sea, still gripping his sword.

MacIan put his sword between his teeth and plunged after his
disappearing enemy.  He had the sense of having the whole universe
on top of him as crest after crest struck him down.  It seemed to
him quite a cosmic collapse, as if all the seven heavens were
falling on him one after the other.  But he got hold of the
atheist's left leg and he did not let it go.

After some ten minutes of foam and frenzy, in which all the
senses at once seemed blasted by the sea, Evan found himself
laboriously swimming on a low, green swell, with the sword still
in his teeth and the editor of _The Atheist_ still under his arm.
What he was going to do he had not even the most glimmering idea;
so he merely kept his grip and swam somehow with one hand.

He ducked instinctively as there bulked above him a big, black
wave, much higher than any that he had seen.  Then he saw that it
was hardly the shape of any possible wave.  Then he saw that it
was a fisherman's boat, and, leaping upward, caught hold of the
bow.  The boat pitched forward with its stern in the air for just
as much time as was needed to see that there was nobody in it.
After a moment or two of desperate clambering, however, there
were two people in it, Mr. Evan MacIan, panting and sweating, and
Mr. James Turnbull, uncommonly close to being drowned.  After ten
minutes' aimless tossing in the empty fishing-boat he recovered,
however, stirred, stretched himself, and looked round on the
rolling waters.  Then, while taking no notice of the streams of
salt water that were pouring from his hair, beard, coat, boots,
and trousers, he carefully wiped the wet off his sword-blade to
preserve it from the possibilities of rust.

MacIan found two oars in the bottom of the deserted boat and
began somewhat drearily to row.

           *                    *                   *

A rainy twilight was clearing to cold silver over the moaning
sea, when the battered boat that had rolled and drifted almost
aimlessly all night, came within sight of land, though of land
which looked almost as lost and savage as the waves.  All night
there had been but little lifting in the leaden sea, only now and
then the boat had been heaved up, as on a huge shoulder which
slipped from under it; such occasional sea-quakes came probably
from the swell of some steamer that had passed it in the dark;
otherwise the waves were harmless though restless.  But it was
piercingly cold, and there was, from time to time, a splutter of
rain like the splutter of the spray, which seemed almost to
freeze as it fell.  MacIan, more at home than his companion in
this quite barbarous and elemental sort of adventure, had rowed
toilsomely with the heavy oars whenever he saw anything that
looked like land; but for the most part had trusted with grim
transcendentalism to wind and tide.  Among the implements of their
first outfit the brandy alone had remained to him, and he gave it
to his freezing companion in quantities which greatly alarmed
that temperate Londoner; but MacIan came from the cold seas and
mists where a man can drink a tumbler of raw whisky in a boat
without it making him wink.

When the Highlander began to pull really hard upon the oars,
Turnbull craned his dripping red head out of the boat to see the
goal of his exertions.  It was a sufficiently uninviting one;
nothing so far as could be seen but a steep and shelving bank of
shingle, made of loose little pebbles such as children like, but
slanting up higher than a house.  On the top of the mound, against
the sky line, stood up the brown skeleton of some broken fence or
breakwater.  With the grey and watery dawn crawling up behind it,
the fence really seemed to say to our philosophic adventurers
that they had come at last to the other end of nowhere.

Bent by necessity to his labour, MacIan managed the heavy boat
with real power and skill, and when at length he ran it up on a
smoother part of the slope it caught and held so that they could
clamber out, not sinking farther than their knees into the water
and the shingle.  A foot or two farther up their feet found the
beach firmer, and a few moments afterwards they were leaning on
the ragged breakwater and looking back at the sea they had
escaped.

They had a dreary walk across wastes of grey shingle in the grey
dawn before they began to come within hail of human fields or
roads; nor had they any notion of what fields or roads they would
be.  Their boots were beginning to break up and the confusion of
stones tried them severely, so that they were glad to lean on
their swords, as if they were the staves of pilgrims. MacIan
thought vaguely of a weird ballad of his own country which
describes the soul in Purgatory as walking on a plain full of
sharp stones, and only saved by its own charities upon earth.

        If ever thou gavest hosen and shoon
            Every night and all,
        Sit thee down and put them on,
            And Christ receive thy soul.

Turnbull had no such lyrical meditations, but he was in an even
worse temper.

At length they came to a pale ribbon of road, edged by a shelf of
rough and almost colourless turf; and a few feet up the slope
there stood grey and weather-stained, one of those big wayside
crucifixes which are seldom seen except in Catholic countries.

MacIan put his hand to his head and found that his bonnet was not
there.  Turnbull gave one glance at the crucifix--a glance at once
sympathetic and bitter, in which was concentrated the whole of
Swinburne's poem on the same occasion.

        O hidden face of man, whereover
            The years have woven a viewless veil,
        If thou wert verily man's lover
            What did thy love or blood avail?
        Thy blood the priests mix poison of,
        And in gold shekels coin thy love.

Then, leaving MacIan in his attitude of prayer, Turnbull began to
look right and left very sharply, like one looking for something.
Suddenly, with a little cry, he saw it and ran forward.  A few
yards from them along the road a lean and starved sort of hedge
came pitifully to an end.  Caught upon its prickly angle, however,
there was a very small and very dirty scrap of paper that might
have hung there for months, since it escaped from someone tearing
up a letter or making a spill out of a newspaper.  Turnbull
snatched at it and found it was the corner of a printed page,
very coarsely printed, like a cheap novelette, and just large
enough to contain the words: "_et c'est elle qui_----"

"Hurrah!" cried Turnbull, waving his fragment; "we are safe at
last.  We are free at last.  We are somewhere better than England
or Eden or Paradise.  MacIan, we are in the Land of the Duel!"

"Where do you say?" said the other, looking at him heavily and
with knitted brows, like one almost dazed with the grey doubts of
desolate twilight and drifting sea.

"We are in France!" cried Turnbull, with a voice like a trumpet,
"in the land where things really happen--_Tout arrive en France_.
We arrive in France.  Look at this little message," and he held
out the scrap of paper.  "There's an omen for you superstitious
hill folk.  _C'est elle qui--Mais oui, mais oui, c'est elle qui
sauvera encore le monde_."

"France!" repeated MacIan, and his eyes awoke again in his head
like large lamps lighted.

"Yes, France!" said Turnbull, and all the rhetorical part of him
came to the top, his face growing as red as his hair.  "France,
that has always been in rebellion for liberty and reason.  France,
that has always assailed superstition with the club of Rabelais
or the rapier of Voltaire.  France, at whose first council table
sits the sublime figure of Julian the Apostate.  France, where a
man said only the other day those splendid unanswerable
words"--with a superb gesture--"'we have extinguished in heaven
those lights that men shall never light again.'"

"No," said MacIan, in a voice that shook with a controlled
passion.  "But France, which was taught by St. Bernard and led to
war by Joan of Arc.  France that made the crusades.  France that
saved the Church and scattered the heresies by the mouths of
Bossuet and Massillon.  France, which shows today the conquering
march of Catholicism, as brain after brain surrenders to it,
Brunetire, Coppe, Hauptmann, Barrs, Bourget, Lematre."

"France!" asserted Turnbull with a sort of rollicking
self-exaggeration, very unusual with him, "France, which is one
torrent of splendid scepticism from Abelard to Anatole France."

"France," said MacIan, "which is one cataract of clear faith from
St. Louis to Our Lady of Lourdes."

"France at least," cried Turnbull, throwing up his sword in
schoolboy triumph, "in which these things are thought about and
fought about.  France, where reason and religion clash in one
continual tournament.  France, above all, where men understand the
pride and passion which have plucked our blades from their
scabbards.  Here, at least, we shall not be chased and spied on by
sickly parsons and greasy policemen, because we wish to put our
lives on the game.  Courage, my friend, we have come to the
country of honour."

MacIan did not even notice the incongruous phrase "my friend",
but nodding again and again, drew his sword and flung the
scabbard far behind him in the road.

"Yes," he cried, in a voice of thunder, "we will fight here and
_He_ shall look on at it."

Turnbull glanced at the crucifix with a sort of scowling
good-humour and then said: "He may look and see His cross
defeated."

"The cross cannot be defeated," said MacIan, "for it is Defeat."

A second afterwards the two bright, blood-thirsty weapons made
the sign of the cross in horrible parody upon each other.

They had not touched each other twice, however, when upon the
hill, above the crucifix, there appeared another horrible parody
of its shape; the figure of a man who appeared for an instant
waving his outspread arms.  He had vanished in an instant; but
MacIan, whose fighting face was set that way, had seen the shape
momentarily but quite photographically.  And while it was like a
comic repetition of the cross, it was also, in that place and
hour, something more incredible.  It had been only instantaneously
on the retina of his eye; but unless his eye and mind were going
mad together, the figure was that of an ordinary London
policeman.

He tried to concentrate his senses on the sword-play; but one
half of his brain was wrestling with the puzzle; the apocalyptic
and almost seraphic apparition of a stout constable out of
Clapham on top of a dreary and deserted hill in France.  He did
not, however, have to puzzle long.  Before the duellists had
exchanged half a dozen passes, the big, blue policeman appeared
once more on the top of the hill, a palpable monstrosity in the
eye of heaven.  He was waving only one arm now and seemed to be
shouting directions.  At the same moment a mass of blue blocked
the corner of the road behind the small, smart figure of
Turnbull, and a small company of policemen in the English uniform
came up at a kind of half-military double.

Turnbull saw the stare of consternation in his enemy's face and
swung round to share its cause.  When he saw it, cool as he was,
he staggered back.

"What the devil are you doing here?" he called out in a high,
shrill voice of authority, like one who finds a tramp in his own
larder.

"Well, sir," said the sergeant in command, with that sort of
heavy civility shown only to the evidently guilty, "seems to me
we might ask what are you doing here?"

"We are having an affair of honour," said Turnbull, as if it were
the most rational thing in the world.  "If the French police like
to interfere, let them interfere.  But why the blue blazes should
you interfere, you great blue blundering sausages?"

"I'm afraid, sir," said the sergeant with restraint, "I'm afraid
I don't quite follow you."

"I mean, why don't the French police take this up if it's got to
be taken up?  I always heard that they were spry enough in their
own way."

"Well, sir," said the sergeant reflectively, "you see, sir, the
French police don't take this up--well, because you see, sir,
this ain't France.  This is His Majesty's dominions, same as
'Ampstead 'eath."

"Not France?" repeated Turnbull, with a sort of dull incredulity.

"No, sir," said the sergeant; "though most of the people talk
French.  This is the island called St. Loup, sir, an island in the
Channel.  We've been sent down specially from London, as you were
such specially distinguished criminals, if you'll allow me to say
so.  Which reminds me to warn you that anything you say may be
used against you at your trial."

"Quite so," said Turnbull, and lurched suddenly against the
sergeant, so as to tip him over the edge of the road with a crash
into the shingle below.  Then leaving MacIan and the policemen
equally and instantaneously nailed to the road, he ran a little
way along it, leapt off on to a part of the beach, which he had
found in his journey to be firmer, and went across it with a
clatter of pebbles.  His sudden calculation was successful; the
police, unacquainted with the various levels of the loose beach,
tried to overtake him by the shorter cut and found themselves,
being heavy men, almost up to their knees in shoals of slippery
shingle.  Two who had been slower with their bodies were quicker
with their minds, and seeing Turnbull's trick, ran along the edge
of the road after him.  Then MacIan finally awoke, and leaving
half his sleeve in the grip of the only man who tried to hold
him, took the two policemen in the small of their backs with the
impetus of a cannon-ball and, sending them also flat among the
stones, went tearing after his twin defier of the law.

As they were both good runners, the start they had gained was
decisive.  They dropped over a high breakwater farther on upon the
beach, turned sharply, and scrambled up a line of ribbed rocks,
crowned with a thicket, crawled through it, scratching their
hands and faces, and dropped into another road; and there found
that they could slacken their speed into a steady trot.  In all
this desperate dart and scramble, they still kept hold of their
drawn swords, which now, indeed, in the vigorous phrase of
Bunyan, seemed almost to grow out of their hands.

They had run another half mile or so when it became apparent that
they were entering a sort of scattered village.  One or two
whitewashed cottages and even a shop had appeared along the side
of the road.  Then, for the first time, Turnbull twisted round his
red bear to get a glimpse of his companion, who was a foot or two
behind, and remarked abruptly: "Mr. MacIan, we've been going the
wrong way to work all along.  We're traced everywhere, because
everybody knows about us.  It's as if one went about with Kruger's
beard on Mafeking Night."

"What do you mean?" said MacIan, innocently.

"I mean," said Turnbull, with steady conviction, "that what we
want is a little diplomacy, and I am going to buy some in a
shop."



XI. A SCANDAL IN THE VILLAGE

In the little hamlet of Haroc, in the Isle of St. Loup, there
lived a man who--though living under the English flag--was
absolutely untypical of the French tradition.  He was quite
unnoticeable, but that was exactly where he was quite himself.  He
was not even extraordinarily French; but then it is against the
French tradition to be extraordinarily French.  Ordinary
Englishmen would only have thought him a little old-fashioned;
imperialistic Englishmen would really have mistaken him for the
old John Bull of the caricatures.  He was stout; he was quite
undistinguished; and he had side-whiskers, worn just a little
longer than John Bull's.  He was by name Pierre Durand; he was by
trade a wine merchant; he was by politics a conservative
republican; he had been brought up a Catholic, had always thought
and acted as an agnostic, and was very mildly returning to the
Church in his later years.  He had a genius (if one can even use
so wild a word in connexion with so tame a person) a genius for
saying the conventional thing on every conceivable subject; or
rather what we in England would call the conventional thing.  For
it was not convention with him, but solid and manly conviction.
Convention implies cant or affectation, and he had not the
faintest smell of either.  He was simply an ordinary citizen with
ordinary views; and if you had told him so he would have taken it
as an ordinary compliment.  If you had asked him about women, he
would have said that one must preserve their domesticity and
decorum; he would have used the stalest words, but he would have
in reserve the strongest arguments.  If you had asked him about
government, he would have said that all citizens were free and
equal, but he would have meant what he said.  If you had asked him
about education, he would have said that the young must be
trained up in habits of industry and of respect for their
parents.  Still he would have set them the example of industry,
and he would have been one of the parents whom they could
respect.  A state of mind so hopelessly central is depressing to
the English instinct.  But then in England a man announcing these
platitudes is generally a fool and a frightened fool, announcing
them out of mere social servility.  But Durand was anything but a
fool; he had read all the eighteenth century, and could have
defended his platitudes round every angle of eighteenth-century
argument.  And certainly he was anything but a coward: swollen and
sedentary as he was, he could have hit any man back who touched
him with the instant violence of an automatic machine; and dying
in a uniform would have seemed to him only the sort of thing that
sometimes happens.  I am afraid it is impossible to explain this
monster amid the exaggerative sects and the eccentric clubs of my
country.  He was merely a man.

He lived in a little villa which was furnished well with
comfortable chairs and tables and highly uncomfortable classical
pictures and medallions.  The art in his home contained nothing
between the two extremes of hard, meagre designs of Greek heads
and Roman togas, and on the other side a few very vulgar Catholic
images in the crudest colours; these were mostly in his
daughter's room.  He had recently lost his wife, whom he had loved
heartily and rather heavily in complete silence, and upon whose
grave he was constantly in the habit of placing hideous little
wreaths, made out of a sort of black-and-white beads.  To his only
daughter he was equally devoted, though he restricted her a good
deal under a sort of theoretic alarm about her innocence; an
alarm which was peculiarly unnecessary, first, because she was an
exceptionally reticent and religious girl, and secondly, because
there was hardly anybody else in the place.

Madeleine Durand was physically a sleepy young woman, and might
easily have been supposed to be morally a lazy one.  It is,
however, certain that the work of her house was done somehow, and
it is even more rapidly ascertainable that nobody else did it.
The logician is, therefore, driven back upon the assumption that
she did it; and that lends a sort of mysterious interest to her
personality at the beginning.  She had very broad, low, and level
brows, which seemed even lower because her warm yellow hair
clustered down to her eyebrows; and she had a face just plump
enough not to look as powerful as it was.  Anything that was heavy
in all this was abruptly lightened by two large, light china-blue
eyes, lightened all of a sudden as if it had been lifted into the
air by two big blue butterflies.  The rest of her was less than
middle-sized, and was of a casual and comfortable sort; and she
had this difference from such girls as the girl in the motor-car,
that one did not incline to take in her figure at all, but only
her broad and leonine and innocent head.

Both the father and the daughter were of the sort that would
normally have avoided all observation; that is, all observation
in that extraordinary modern world which calls out everything
except strength.  Both of them had strength below the surface;
they were like quiet peasants owning enormous and unquarried
mines.  The father with his square face and grey side whiskers,
the daughter with her square face and golden fringe of hair, were
both stronger than they know; stronger than anyone knew.  The
father believed in civilization, in the storied tower we have
erected to affront nature; that is, the father believed in Man.
The daughter believed in God; and was even stronger.  They neither
of them believed in themselves; for that is a decadent weakness.

The daughter was called a devotee.  She left upon ordinary people
the impression--the somewhat irritating impression--produced by
such a person; it can only be described as the sense of strong
water being perpetually poured into some abyss.  She did her
housework easily; she achieved her social relations sweetly; she
was never neglectful and never unkind.  This accounted for all
that was soft in her, but not for all that was hard.  She trod
firmly as if going somewhere; she flung her face back as if
defying something; she hardly spoke a cross word, yet there was
often battle in her eyes.  The modern man asked doubtfully where
all this silent energy went to.  He would have stared still more
doubtfully if he had been told that it all went into her prayers.

The conventions of the Isle of St. Loup were necessarily a
compromise or confusion between those of France and England; and
it was vaguely possible for a respectable young lady to have
half-attached lovers, in a way that would be impossible to the
_bourgeoisie_ of France.  One man in particular had made himself
an unmistakable figure in the track of this girl as she went to
church.  He was a short, prosperous-looking man, whose long, bushy
black beard and clumsy black umbrella made him seem both shorter
and older than he really was; but whose big, bold eyes, and step
that spurned the ground, gave him an instant character of youth.

His name was Camille Bert, and he was a commercial traveller who
had only been in the island an idle week before he began to
hover in the tracks of Madeleine Durand.  Since everyone knows
everyone in so small a place, Madeleine certainly knew him to
speak to; but it is not very evident that she ever spoke.  He
haunted her, however; especially at church, which was, indeed,
one of the few certain places for finding her.  In her home she
had a habit of being invisible, sometimes through insatiable
domesticity, sometimes through an equally insatiable solitude.  M.
Bert did not give the impression of a pious man, though he did
give, especially with his eyes, the impression of an honest one.
But he went to Mass with a simple exactitude that could not be
mistaken for a pose, or even for a vulgar fascination.  It was
perhaps this religious regularity which eventually drew Madeleine
into recognition of him.  At least it is certain that she twice
spoke to him with her square and open smile in the porch of the
church; and there was human nature enough in the hamlet to turn
even that into gossip.

But the real interest arose suddenly as a squall arises with the
extraordinary affair that occurred about five days after.  There
was about a third of a mile beyond the village of Haroc a large
but lonely hotel upon the London or Paris model, but commonly
almost entirely empty.  Among the accidental group of guests who
had come to it at this season was a man whose nationality no one
could fix and who bore the non-committal name of Count Gregory.
He treated everybody with complete civility and almost in
complete silence.  On the few occasions when he spoke, he spoke
either French, English, or once (to the priest) Latin; and the
general opinion was that he spoke them all wrong.  He was a large,
lean man, with the stoop of an aged eagle, and even the eagle's
nose to complete it; he had old-fashioned military whiskers and
moustache dyed with a garish and highly incredible yellow.  He had
the dress of a showy gentleman and the manners of a decayed
gentleman; he seemed (as with a sort of simplicity) to be trying
to be a dandy when he was too old even to know that he was old.
Ye he was decidedly a handsome figure with his curled yellow hair
and lean fastidious face; and he wore a peculiar frock-coat of
bright turquoise blue, with an unknown order pinned to it, and he
carried a huge and heavy cane.  Despite his silence and his
dandified dress and whiskers, the island might never have heard
of him but for the extraordinary event of which I have spoken,
which fell about in the following way:

In such casual atmospheres only the enthusiastic go to
Benediction; and as the warm blue twilight closed over the little
candle-lit church and village, the line of worshippers who went
home from the former to the latter thinned out until it broke.  On
one such evening at least no one was in church except the quiet,
unconquerable Madeleine, four old women, one fisherman, and, of
course, the irrepressible M. Camille Bert.  The others seemed to
melt away afterwards into the peacock colours of the dim green
grass and the dark blue sky.  Even Durand was invisible instead of
being merely reverentially remote; and Madeleine set forth
through the patch of black forest alone.  She was not in the least
afraid of loneliness, because she was not afraid of devils.  I
think they were afraid of her.

In a clearing of the wood, however, which was lit up with a last
patch of the perishing sunlight, there advanced upon her suddenly
one who was more startling than a devil.  The incomprehensible
Count Gregory, with his yellow hair like flame and his face like
the white ashes of the flame, was advancing bareheaded towards
her, flinging out his arms and his long fingers with a frantic
gesture.

"We are alone here," he cried, "and you would be at my mercy,
only that I am at yours."

Then his frantic hands fell by his sides and he looked up under
his brows with an expression that went well with his hard
breathing.  Madeleine Durand had come to a halt at first in
childish wonder, and now, with more than masculine self-control,
"I fancy I know your face, sir," she said, as if to gain time.

"I know I shall not forget yours," said the other, and extended
once more his ungainly arms in an unnatural gesture.  Then of a
sudden there came out of him a spout of wild and yet pompous
phrases.  "It is as well that you should know the worst and the
best.  I am a man who knows no limit; I am the most callous of
criminals, the most unrepentant of sinners.  There is no man in my
dominions so vile as I.  But my dominions stretch from the olives
of Italy to the fir-woods of Denmark, and there is no nook of all
of them in which I have not done a sin.  But when I bear you away
I shall be doing my first sacrilege, and also my first act of
virtue."  He seized her suddenly by the elbow; and she did not
scream but only pulled and tugged.  Yet though she had not
screamed, someone astray in the woods seemed to have heard the
struggle.  A short but nimble figure came along the woodland path
like a humming bullet and had caught Count Gregory a crack across
the face before his own could be recognized.  When it was
recognized it was that of Camille, with the black elderly beard
and the young ardent eyes.

Up to the moment when Camille had hit the Count, Madeleine had
entertained no doubt that the Count was merely a madman.  Now she
was startled with a new sanity; for the tall man in the yellow
whiskers and yellow moustache first returned the blow of Bert, as
if it were a sort of duty, and then stepped back with a slight
bow and an easy smile.

"This need go no further here, M. Bert," he said.  "I need not
remind you how far it should go elsewhere."

"Certainly, you need remind me of nothing," answered Camille,
stolidly.  "I am glad that you are just not too much of a
scoundrel for a gentleman to fight."

"We are detaining the lady," said Count Gregory, with politeness;
and, making a gesture suggesting that he would have taken off his
hat if he had had one, he strode away up the avenue of trees and
eventually disappeared.  He was so complete an aristocrat that he
could offer his back to them all the way up that avenue; and his
back never once looked uncomfortable.

"You must allow me to see you home," said Bert to the girl, in a
gruff and almost stifled voice; "I think we have only a little
way to go."

"Only a little way," she said, and smiled once more that night,
in spite of fatigue and fear and the world and the flesh and the
devil.  The glowing and transparent blue of twilight had long been
covered by the opaque and slatelike blue of night, when he
handed her into the lamp-lit interior of her home.  He went out
himself into the darkness, walking sturdily, but tearing at his
black beard.

All the French or semi-French gentry of the district considered
this a case in which a duel was natural and inevitable, and
neither party had any difficulty in finding seconds, strangers as
they were in the place.  Two small landowners, who were careful,
practising Catholics, willingly undertook to represent that
strict church-goer Camille Burt; while the profligate but
apparently powerful Count Gregory found friends in an energetic
local doctor who was ready for social promotion and an accidental
Californian tourist who was ready for anything.  As no particular
purpose could be served by delay, it was arranged that the affair
should fall out three days afterwards.  And when this was settled
the whole community, as it were, turned over again in bed and
thought no more about the matter.  At least there was only one
member of it who seemed to be restless, and that was she who was
commonly most restful.  On the next night Madeleine Durand went to
church as usual; and as usual the stricken Camille was there
also.  What was not so usual was that when they were a bow-shot
from the church Madeleine turned round and walked back to him.
"Sir," she began, "it is not wrong of me to speak to you," and
the very words gave him a jar of unexpected truth; for in all the
novels he had ever read she would have begun: "It is wrong of me
to speak to you."  She went on with wide and serious eyes like an
animal's: "It is not wrong of me to speak to you, because your
soul, or anybody's soul, matters so much more than what the world
says about anybody.  I want to talk to you about what you are
going to do."

Bert saw in front of him the inevitable heroine of the novels
trying to prevent bloodshed; and his pale firm face became
implacable.

"I would do anything but that for you," he said; "but no man can
be called less than a man."

She looked at him for a moment with a face openly puzzled, and
then broke into an odd and beautiful half-smile.

"Oh, I don't mean that," she said; "I don't talk about what I
don't understand.  No one has ever hit me; and if they had I
should not feel as a man may.  I am sure it is not the best thing
to fight.  It would be better to forgive--if one could really
forgive.  But when people dine with my father and say that
fighting a duel is mere murder--of course I can see that is not
just.  It's all so different--having a reason--and letting the
other man know--and using the same guns and things--and doing it
in front of your friends.  I'm awfully stupid, but I know that men
like you aren't murderers.  But it wasn't that that I meant."

"What did you mean?" asked the other, looking broodingly at the
earth.

"Don't you know," she said, "there is only one more celebration?
I thought that as you always go to church--I thought you would
communicate this morning."

Bert stepped backward with a sort of action she had never seen in
him before.  It seemed to alter his whole body.

"You may be right or wrong to risk dying," said the girl, simply;
"the poor women in our village risk it whenever they have a baby.
You men are the other half of the world.  I know nothing about
when you ought to die.  But surely if you are daring to try and
find God beyond the grave and appeal to Him--you ought to let Him
find you when He comes and stands there every morning in our
little church."

And placid as she was, she made a little gesture of argument, of
which the pathos wrung the heart.

M. Camille Bert was by no means placid.  Before that incomplete
gesture and frankly pleading face he retreated as if from the
jaws of a dragon.  His dark black hair and beard looked utterly
unnatural against the startling pallor of his face.  When at last
he said something it was: "O God!  I can't stand this!"  He did not
say it in French.  Nor did he, strictly speaking, say it in
English.  The truth (interesting only to anthropologists) is that
he said it in Scotch.

"There will be another mass in a matter of eight hours," said
Madeleine, with a sort of business eagerness and energy, "and you
can do it then before the fighting.  You must forgive me, but I
was so frightened that you would not do it at all."

Bert seemed to crush his teeth together until they broke, and
managed to say between them: "And why should you suppose that I
shouldn't do as you say--I mean not to do it at all?"

"You always go to Mass," answered the girl, opening her wide blue
eyes, "and the Mass is very long and tiresome unless one loves
God."

Then it was that Bert exploded with a brutality which might have
come from Count Gregory, his criminal opponent.  He advanced upon
Madeleine with flaming eyes, and almost took her by the two
shoulders.  "I do not love God," he cried, speaking French with
the broadest Scotch accent; "I do not want to find Him; I do not
think He is there to be found.  I must burst up the show; I must
and will say everything.  You are the happiest and honestest thing
I ever saw in this godless universe.  And I am the dirtiest and
most dishonest."

Madeleine looked at him doubtfully for an instant, and then said
with a sudden simplicity and cheerfulness: "Oh, but if you are
really sorry it is all right.  If you are horribly sorry it is all
the better.  You have only to go and tell the priest so and he
will give you God out of his own hands."

"I hate your priest and I deny your God!" cried the man, "and I
tell you God is a lie and a fable and a mask.  And for the first
time in my life I do not feel superior to God."

"What can it all mean?" said Madeleine, in massive wonder.

"Because I am a fable also and a mask," said the man.  He had been
plucking fiercely at his black beard and hair all the time; now
he suddenly plucked them off and flung them like moulted feathers
in the mire.  This extraordinary spoliation left in the sunlight
the same face, but a much younger head--a head with close
chestnut curls and a short chestnut beard.

"Now you know the truth," he answered, with hard eyes.  "I am a
cad who has played a crooked trick on a quiet village and a
decent woman for a private reason of his own.  I might have played
it successfully on any other woman; I have hit the one woman on
whom it cannot be played.  It's just like my damned luck.  The
plain truth is," and here when he came to the plain truth he
boggled and blundered as Evan had done in telling it to the girl
in the motor-car.

"The plain truth is," he said at last, "that I am James Turnbull
the atheist.  The police are after me; not for atheism but for
being ready to fight for it."

"I saw something about you in a newspaper," said the girl, with a
simplicity which even surprise could never throw off its balance.

"Evan MacIan said there was a God," went on the other,
stubbornly, "and I say there isn't.  And I have come to fight for
the fact that there is no God; it is for that that I have seen
this cursed island and your blessed face."

"You want me really to believe," said Madeleine, with parted
lips, "that you think----"

"I want you to hate me!" cried Turnbull, in agony.  "I want you to
be sick when you think of my name.  I am sure there is no God."

"But there is," said Madeleine, quite quietly, and rather with
the air of one telling children about an elephant.  "Why, I
touched His body only this morning."

"You touched a bit of bread," said Turnbull, biting his knuckles.
"Oh, I will say anything that can madden you!"

"You think it is only a bit of bread," said the girl, and her
lips tightened ever so little.

"I know it is only a bit of bread," said Turnbull, with violence.

She flung back her open face and smiled.  "Then why did you refuse
to eat it?" she said.

James Turnbull made a little step backward, and for the first
time in his life there seemed to break out and blaze in his head
thoughts that were not his own.

"Why, how silly of them," cried out Madeleine, with quite a
schoolgirl gaiety, "why, how silly of them to call _you_ a
blasphemer!  Why, you have wrecked your whole business because you
would not commit blasphemy."

The man stood, a somewhat comic figure in his tragic
bewilderment, with the honest red head of James Turnbull sticking
out of the rich and fictitious garments of Camille Bert.  But the
startled pain of his face was strong enough to obliterate the
oddity.

"You come down here," continued the lady, with that female
emphasis which is so pulverizing in conversation and so feeble at
a public meeting, "you and your MacIan come down here and put on
false beards or noses in order to fight.  You pretend to be a
Catholic commercial traveller from France.  Poor Mr. MacIan has to
pretend to be a dissolute nobleman from nowhere.  Your scheme
succeeds; you pick a quite convincing quarrel; you arrange a
quite respectable duel; the duel you have planned so long will
come off tomorrow with absolute certainty and safety.  And then
you throw off your wig and throw up your scheme and throw over
your colleague, because I ask you to go into a building and eat a
bit of bread.  And _then_ you dare to tell me that you are sure
there is nothing watching us.  Then you say you know there is
nothing on the very altar you run away from.  You know----"

"I only know," said Turnbull, "that I must run away from you.
This has got beyond any talking."  And he plunged along into the
village, leaving his black wig and beard lying behind him on the
road.

As the market-place opened before him he saw Count Gregory, that
distinguished foreigner, standing and smoking in elegant
meditation at the corner of the local caf.  He immediately made
his way rapidly towards him, considering that a consultation was
urgent.  But he had hardly crossed half of that stony quadrangle
when a window burst open above him and a head was thrust out,
shouting.  The man was in his woollen undershirt, but Turnbull
knew the energetic, apologetic head of the sergeant of police.  He
pointed furiously at Turnbull and shouted his name.  A policeman
ran excitedly from under an archway and tried to collar him.  Two
men selling vegetables dropped their baskets and joined in the
chase.  Turnbull dodged the constable, upset one of the men into
his own basket, and bounding towards the distinguished foreign
Count, called to him clamorously: "Come on, MacIan, the hunt is
up again."

The prompt reply of Count Gregory was to pull off his large
yellow whiskers and scatter them on the breeze with an air of
considerable relief.  Then he joined the flight of Turnbull, and
even as he did so, with one wrench of his powerful hands rent and
split the strange, thick stick that he carried.  Inside it was a
naked old-fashioned rapier.  The two got a good start up the road
before the whole town was awakened behind them; and half-way up
it a similar transformation was seen to take place in Mr.
Turnbull's singular umbrella.

The two had a long race for the harbour; but the English police
were heavy and the French inhabitants were indifferent.  In any
case, they got used to the notion of the road being clear; and
just as they had come to the cliffs MacIan banged into another
gentleman with unmistakable surprise.  How he knew he was another
gentleman merely by banging into him, must remain a mystery.
MacIan was a very poor and very sober Scotch gentleman.  The other
was a very drunk and very wealthy English gentleman.  But there
was something in the staggered and openly embarrassed apologies
that made them understand each other as readily and as quickly
and as much as two men talking French in the middle of China.  The
nearest expression of the type is that it either hits or
apologizes; and in this case both apologized.

"You seem to be in a hurry," said the unknown Englishman, falling
back a step or two in order to laugh with an unnatural
heartiness.  "What's it all about, eh?"  Then before MacIan could
get past his sprawling and staggering figure he ran forward again
and said with a sort of shouting and ear-shattering whisper: "I
say, my name is Wilkinson.  _You_ know--Wilkinson's Entire was my
grandfather.  Can't drink beer myself.  Liver."  And he shook his
head with extraordinary sagacity.

"We really are in a hurry, as you say," said MacIan, summoning a
sufficiently pleasant smile, "so if you will let us pass----"

"I'll tell you what, you fellows," said the sprawling gentleman,
confidentially, while Evan's agonized ears heard behind him the
first paces of the pursuit, "if you really are, as you say, in a
hurry, I know what it is to be in a hurry--Lord, what a hurry I
was in when we all came out of Cartwright's rooms--if you really
are in a hurry"--and he seemed to steady his voice into a sort of
solemnity--"if you are in a hurry, there's nothing like a good
yacht for a man in a hurry."

"No doubt you're right," said MacIan, and dashed past him in
despair.  The head of the pursuing host was just showing over the
top of the hill behind him.  Turnbull had already ducked under the
intoxicated gentleman's elbow and fled far in front.

"No, but look here," said Mr. Wilkinson, enthusiastically running
after MacIan and catching him by the sleeve of his coat.  "If you
want to hurry you should take a yacht, and if"--he said, with a
burst of rationality, like one leaping to a further point in
logic--"if you want a yacht--you can have mine."

Evan pulled up abruptly and looked back at him.  "We are really in
the devil of a hurry," he said, "and if you really have a yacht,
the truth is that we would give our ears for it."

"You'll find it in harbour," said Wilkinson, struggling with his
speech.  "Left side of harbour--called _Gibson Girl_--can't think
why, old fellow, I never lent it you before."

With these words the benevolent Mr. Wilkinson fell flat on his
face in the road, but continued to laugh softly, and turned
towards his flying companion a face of peculiar peace and
benignity.  Evan's mind went through a crisis of instantaneous
casuistry, in which it may be that he decided wrongly; but about
how he decided his biographer can profess no doubt.  Two minutes
afterwards he had overtaken Turnbull and told the tale; ten
minutes afterwards he and Turnbull had somehow tumbled into the
yacht called the _Gibson Girl_ and had somehow pushed off from
the Isle of St. Loup.



XII. THE DESERT ISLAND

Those who happen to hold the view (and Mr. Evan MacIan, now alive
and comfortable, is among the number) that something
supernatural, some eccentric kindness from god or fairy had
guided our adventurers through all their absurd perils, might
have found his strongest argument perhaps in their management or
mismanagement of Mr. Wilkinson's yacht.  Neither of them had the
smallest qualification for managing such a vessel; but MacIan had
a practical knowledge of the sea in much smaller and quite
different boats, while Turnbull had an abstract knowledge of
science and some of its applications to navigation, which was
worse.  The presence of the god or fairy can only be deduced from
the fact that they never definitely ran into anything, either a
boat, a rock, a quicksand, or a man-of-war.  Apart from this
negative description, their voyage would be difficult to
describe.  It took at least a fortnight, and MacIan, who was
certainly the shrewder sailor of the two, realized that they were
sailing west into the Atlantic and were probably by this time
past the Scilly Isles.  How much farther they stood out into the
western sea it was impossible to conjecture.  But they felt
certain, at least, that they were far enough into that awful gulf
between us and America to make it unlikely that they would soon
see land again.  It was therefore with legitimate excitement that
one rainy morning after daybreak they saw that distinct shape of
a solitary island standing up against the encircling strip of
silver which ran round the skyline and separated the grey and
green of the billows from the grey and mauve of the morning
clouds.

"What can it be?" cried MacIan, in a dry-throated excitement.  "I
didn't know there were any Atlantic islands so far beyond the
Scillies--Good Lord, it can't be Madeira, yet?"

"I thought you were fond of legends and lies and fables," said
Turnbull, grimly.  "Perhaps it's Atlantis."

"Of course, it might be," answered the other, quite innocently
and gravely; "but I never thought the story about Atlantis was
very solidly established."

"Whatever it is, we are running on to it," said Turnbull,
equably, "and we shall be shipwrecked twice, at any rate."

The naked-looking nose of land projecting from the unknown island
was, indeed, growing larger and larger, like the trunk of some
terrible and advancing elephant.  There seemed to be nothing in
particular, at least on this side of the island, except shoals of
shellfish lying so thick as almost to make it look like one of
those toy grottos that the children make.  In one place, however,
the coast offered a soft, smooth bay of sand, and even the
rudimentary ingenuity of the two amateur mariners managed to run
up the little ship with her prow well on shore and her bowsprit
pointing upward, as in a sort of idiotic triumph.

They tumbled on shore and began to unload the vessel, setting the
stores out in rows upon the sand with something of the solemnity
of boys playing at pirates.  There were Mr. Wilkinson's
cigar-boxes and Mr. Wilkinson's dozen of champagne and Mr.
Wilkinson's tinned salmon and Mr. Wilkinson's tinned tongue and
Mr. Wilkinson's tinned sardines, and every sort of preserved
thing that could be seen at the Army and Navy stores.  Then MacIan
stopped with a jar of pickles in his hand and said abruptly:

"I don't know why we're doing all this; I suppose we ought really
to fall to and get it over."

Then he added more thoughtfully: "Of course this island seems
rather bare and the survivor----"

"The question is," said Turnbull, with cheerful speculation,
"whether the survivor will be in a proper frame of mind for
potted prawns."

MacIan looked down at the rows of tins and bottles, and the cloud
of doubt still lowered upon his face.

"You will permit me two liberties, my dear sir," said Turnbull at
last: "The first is to break open this box and light one of Mr.
Wilkinson's excellent cigars, which will, I am sure, assist my
meditations; the second is to offer a penny for your thoughts; or
rather to convulse the already complex finances of this island by
betting a penny that I know them."

"What on earth are you talking about?" asked MacIan, listlessly,
in the manner of an inattentive child.

"I know what you are really thinking, MacIan," repeated Turnbull,
laughing.  "I know what I am thinking, anyhow.  And I rather fancy
it's the same."

"What are you thinking?" asked Evan.

"I am thinking and you are thinking," said Turnbull, "that it is
damned silly to waste all that champagne."

Something like the spectre of a smile appeared on the unsmiling
visage of the Gael; and he made at least no movement of dissent.

"We could drink all the wine and smoke all the cigars easily in a
week," said Turnbull; "and that would be to die feasting like
heroes."

"Yes, and there is something else," said MacIan, with slight
hesitation.  "You see, we are on an almost unknown rock, lost in
the Atlantic.  The police will never catch us; but then neither
may the public ever hear of us; and that was one of the things we
wanted."  Then, after a pause, he said, drawing in the sand with
his sword-point: "She may never hear of it at all."

"Well?" inquired the other, puffing at his cigar.

"Well," said MacIan, "we might occupy a day or two in drawing up
a thorough and complete statement of what we did and why we did
it, and all about both our points of view.  Then we could leave
one copy on the island whatever happens to us and put another in
an empty bottle and send it out to sea, as they do in the books."

"A good idea," said Turnbull, "and now let us finish unpacking."

As MacIan, a tall, almost ghostly figure, paced along the edge of
sand that ran round the islet, the purple but cloudy poetry which
was his native element was piled up at its thickest upon his
soul.  The unique island and the endless sea emphasized the thing
solely as an epic.  There were no ladies or policemen here to give
him a hint either of its farce or its tragedy.

"Perhaps when the morning stars were made," he said to himself,
"God built this island up from the bottom of the world to be a
tower and a theatre for the fight between yea and nay."

Then he wandered up to the highest level of the rock, where there
was a roof or plateau of level stone.  Half an hour afterwards,
Turnbull found him clearing away the loose sand from this
table-land and making it smooth and even.

"We will fight up here, Turnbull," said MacIan, "when the time
comes.  And till the time comes this place shall be sacred."

"I thought of having lunch up here," said Turnbull, who had a
bottle of champagne in his hand.

"No, no--not up here," said MacIan, and came down from the height
quite hastily.  Before he descended, however, he fixed the two
swords upright, one at each end of the platform, as if they were
human sentinels to guard it under the stars.

Then they came down and lunched plentifully in a nest of loose
rocks.  In the same place that night they supped more plentifully
still.  The smoke of Mr. Wilkinson's cigars went up ceaseless and
strong smelling, like a pagan sacrifice; the golden glories of
Mr. Wilkinson's champagne rose to their heads and poured out of
them in fancies and philosophies.  And occasionally they would
look up at the starlight and the rock and see the space guarded
by the two cross-hilted swords, which looked like two black
crosses at either end of a grave.

In this primitive and Homeric truce the week passed by; it
consisted almost entirely of eating, drinking, smoking, talking,
and occasionally singing.  They wrote their records and cast loose
their bottle.  They never ascended to the ominous plateau; they
had never stood there save for that single embarrassed minute
when they had had no time to take stock of the seascape or the
shape of the land.  They did not even explore the island; for
MacIan was partly concerned in prayer and Turnbull entirely
concerned with tobacco; and both these forms of inspiration can
be enjoyed by the secluded and even the sedentary.  It was on a
golden afternoon, the sun sinking over the sea, rayed like the
very head of Apollo, when Turnbull tossed off the last half-pint
from the emptied Wilkinsonian bottle, hurled the bottle into the
sea with objectless energy, and went up to where his sword stood
waiting for him on the hill.  MacIan was already standing heavily
by his with bent head and eyes reading the ground.  He had not
even troubled to throw a glance round the island or the horizon.
But Turnbull being of a more active and birdlike type of mind did
throw a glance round the scene.  The consequence of which was that
he nearly fell off the rock.

On three sides of this shelly and sandy islet the sea stretched
blue and infinite without a speck of land or sail; the same as
Turnbull had first seen it, except that the tide being out it
showed a few yards more of slanting sand under the roots of the
rocks.  But on the fourth side the island exhibited a more
extraordinary feature.  In fact, it exhibited the extraordinary
feature of not being an island at all.  A long, curving neck of
sand, as smooth and wet as the neck of the sea serpent, ran out
into the sea and joined their rock to a line of low, billowing,
and glistening sand-hills, which the sinking sea had just bared
to the sun.  Whether they were firm sand or quicksand it was
difficult to guess; but there was at least no doubt that they lay
on the edge of some larger land; for colourless hills appeared
faintly behind them and no sea could be seen beyond.

"Sakes alive!" cried Turnbull, with rolling eyes; "this ain't an
island in the Atlantic.  We've butted the bally continent of
America."

MacIan turned his head, and his face, already pale, grew a shade
paler.  He was by this time walking in a world of omens and
hieroglyphics, and he could not read anything but what was
baffling or menacing in this brown gigantic arm of the earth
stretched out into the sea to seize him.

"MacIan," said Turnbull, in his temperate way, "whatever our
eternal interrupted tete-a-tetes have taught us or not taught us,
at least we need not fear the charge of fear.  If it is essential
to your emotions, I will cheerfully finish the fight here and
now; but I must confess that if you kill me here I shall die with
my curiosity highly excited and unsatisfied upon a minor point of
geography."

"I do not want to stop now," said the other, in his elephantine
simplicity, "but we must stop for a moment, because it is a
sign--perhaps it is a miracle.  We must see what is at the end of
the road of sand; it may be a bridge built across the gulf by
God."

"So long as you gratify my query," said Turnbull, laughing and
letting back his blade into the sheath, "I do not care for what
reason you choose to stop."

They clambered down the rocky peninsula and trudged along the
sandy isthmus with the plodding resolution of men who seemed
almost to have made up their minds to be wanderers on the face of
the earth.  Despite Turnbull's air of scientific eagerness, he was
really the less impatient of the two; and the Highlander went on
well ahead of him with passionate strides.  By the time they had
walked for about half an hour in the ups and downs of those
dreary sands, the distance between the two had lengthened and
MacIan was only a tall figure silhouetted for an instant upon the
crest of some sand-dune and then disappearing behind it.  This
rather increased the Robinson Crusoe feeling in Mr. Turnbull, and
he looked about almost disconsolately for some sign of life.  What
sort of life he expected it to be if it appeared, he did not very
clearly know.  He has since confessed that he thinks that in his
subconsciousness he expected an alligator.

The first sign of life that he did see, however, was something
more extraordinary than the largest alligator.  It was nothing
less than the notorious Mr. Evan MacIan coming bounding back
across the sand-heaps breathless, without his cap and keeping the
sword in his hand only by a habit now quite hardened.

"Take care, Turnbull," he cried out from a good distance as he
ran, "I've seen a native."

"A native?" repeated his companion, whose scenery had of late
been chiefly of shellfish, "what the deuce!  Do you mean an
oyster?"

"No," said MacIan, stopping and breathing hard, "I mean a savage.
A black man."

"Why, where did you see him?" asked the staring editor.

"Over there--behind that hill," said the gasping MacIan.  "He put
up his black head and grinned at me."

Turnbull thrust his hands through his red hair like one who gives
up the world as a bad riddle.  "Lord love a duck," said he, "can
it be Jamaica?"

Then glancing at his companion with a small frown, as of one
slightly suspicious, he said: "I say, don't think me rude--but
you're a visionary kind of fellow--and then we drank a great
deal.  Do you mind waiting here while I go and see for myself?"

"Shout if you get into trouble," said the Celt, with composure;
"you will find it as I say."

Turnbull ran off ahead with a rapidity now far greater than his
rival's, and soon vanished over the disputed sand-hill.  Then five
minutes passed, and then seven minutes; and MacIan bit his lip
and swung his sword, and the other did not reappear.  Finally,
with a Gaelic oath, Evan started forward to the rescue, and
almost at the same moment the small figure of the missing man
appeared on the ridge against the sky.

Even at that distance, however, there was something odd about his
attitude; so odd that MacIan continued to make his way in that
direction.  It looked as if he were wounded; or, still more, as if
he were ill.  He wavered as he came down the slope and seemed
flinging himself into peculiar postures.  But it was only when he
came within three feet of MacIan's face, that that observer of
mankind fully realized that Mr. James Turnbull was roaring with
laughter.

"You are quit right," sobbed that wholly demoralized journalist.
"He's black, oh, there's no doubt the black's all right--as far
as it goes."  And he went off again into convulsions of his
humorous ailment.

"What ever is the matter with you?" asked MacIan, with stern
impatience.  "Did you see the nigger----"

"I saw the nigger," gasped Turnbull.  "I saw the splendid
barbarian Chief.  I saw the Emperor of Ethiopia--oh, I saw him all
right.  The nigger's hands and face are a lovely colour--and the
nigger----" And he was overtaken once more.

"Well, well, well," said Evan, stamping each monosyllable on the
sand, "what about the nigger?"

"Well, the truth is," said Turnbull, suddenly and startlingly,
becoming quite grave and precise, "the truth is, the nigger is a
Margate nigger, and we are now on the edge of the Isle of Thanet,
a few miles from Margate."

Then he had a momentary return of his hysteria and said: "I say,
old boy, I should like to see a chart of our fortnight's cruise
in Wilkinson's yacht."

MacIan had no smile in answer, but his eager lips opened as if
parched for the truth.  "You mean to say," he began----

"Yes, I mean to say," said Turnbull, "and I mean to say something
funnier still.  I have learnt everything I wanted to know from the
partially black musician over there, who has taken a run in his
war-paint to meet a friend in a quiet pub along the coast--the
noble savage has told me all about it.  The bottle containing our
declaration, doctrines, and dying sentiments was washed up on
Margate beach yesterday in the presence of one alderman, two
bathing-machine men, three policemen, seven doctors, and a
hundred and thirteen London clerks on a holiday, to all of whom,
whether directly or indirectly, our composition gave enormous
literary pleasure.  Buck up, old man, this story of ours is a
switchback.  I have begun to understand the pulse and the time of
it; now we are up in a cathedral and then we are down in a
theatre, where they only play farces.  Come, I am quite
reconciled--let us enjoy the farce."

But MacIan said nothing, and an instant afterwards Turnbull
himself called out in an entirely changed voice: "Oh, this is
damnable!  This is not to be borne!"

MacIan followed his eye along the sand-hills.  He saw what looked
like the momentary and waving figure of the nigger minstrel, and
then he saw a heavy running policeman take the turn of the
sand-hill with the smooth solemnity of a railway train.



XIII. THE GARDEN OF PEACE

Up to this instant Evan MacIan had really understood nothing; but
when he saw the policeman he saw everything.  He saw his enemies,
all the powers and princes of the earth.  He suddenly altered from
a staring statue to a leaping man of the mountains.

"We must break away from him here," he cried, briefly, and went
like a whirlwind over the sand ridge in a straight line and at a
particular angle.  When the policeman had finished his admirable
railway curve, he found a wall of failing sand between him and
the pursued.  By the time he had scaled it thrice, slid down
twice, and crested it in the third effort, the two flying figures
were far in front.  They found the sand harder farther on; it
began to be crusted with scraps of turf and in a few moments they
were flying easily over an open common of rank sea-grass.  They
had no easy business, however; for the bottle which they had so
innocently sent into the chief gate of Thanet had called to life
the police of half a county on their trail.  From every side
across the grey-green common figures could be seen running and
closing in; and it was only when MacIan with his big body broke
down the tangled barrier of a little wood, as men break down a
door with the shoulder; it was only when they vanished crashing
into the underworld of the black wood, that their hunters were
even instantaneously thrown off the scent.

At the risk of struggling a little longer like flies in that
black web of twigs and trunks, Evan (who had an instinct of the
hunter or the hunted) took an incalculable course through the
forest, which let them out at last by a forest opening--quite
forgotten by the leaders of the chase.  They ran a mile or two
farther along the edge of the wood until they reached another and
somewhat similar opening.  Then MacIan stood utterly still and
listened, as animals listen, for every sound in the universe.
Then he said: "We are quit of them."  And Turnbull said: "Where
shall we go now?"

MacIan looked at the silver sunset that was closing in, barred by
plumy lines of purple cloud; he looked at the high tree-tops that
caught the last light and at the birds going heavily homeward,
just as if all these things were bits of written advice that he
could read.

Then he said: "The best place we can go to is to bed.  If we can
get some sleep in this wood, now everyone has cleared out of it,
it will be worth a handicap of two hundred yards tomorrow."

Turnbull, who was exceptionally lively and laughing in his
demeanour, kicked his legs about like a schoolboy and said he did
not want to go to sleep.  He walked incessantly and talked very
brilliantly.  And when at last he lay down on the hard earth,
sleep struck him senseless like a hammer.

Indeed, he needed the strongest sleep he could get; for the earth
was still full of darkness and a kind of morning fog when his
fellow-fugitive shook him awake.

"No more sleep, I'm afraid," said Evan, in a heavy, almost
submissive, voice of apology.  "They've gone on past us right
enough for a good thirty miles; but now they've found out their
mistake, and they're coming back."

"Are you sure?" said Turnbull, sitting up and rubbing his red
eyebrows with his hand.

The next moment, however, he had jumped up alive and leaping like
a man struck with a shock of cold water, and he was plunging
after MacIan along the woodland path.  The shape of their old
friend the constable had appeared against the pearl and pink of
the sunrise.  Somehow, it always looked a very funny shape when
seen against the sunrise.

           *                    *                   *

A wash of weary daylight was breaking over the country-side, and
the fields and roads were full of white mist--the kind of white
mist that clings in corners like cotton wool.  The empty road,
along which the chase had taken its turn, was overshadowed on one
side by a very high discoloured wall, stained, and streaked
green, as with seaweed--evidently the high-shouldered sentinel of
some great gentleman's estate.  A yard or two from the wall ran
parallel to it a linked and tangled line of lime-trees, forming a
kind of cloister along the side of the road.  It was under this
branching colonnade that the two fugitives fled, almost concealed
from their pursuers by the twilight, the mist and the leaping
zoetrope of shadows.  Their feet, though beating the ground
furiously, made but a faint noise; for they had kicked away their
boots in the wood; their long, antiquated weapons made no jingle
or clatter, for they had strapped them across their backs like
guitars.  They had all the advantages that invisibility and
silence can add to speed.

A hundred and fifty yards behind them down the centre of the
empty road the first of their pursuers came pounding and
panting--a fat but powerful policeman who had distanced all the
rest.  He came on at a splendid pace for so portly a figure; but,
like all heavy bodies in motion, he gave the impression that it
would be easier for him to increase his pace than to slacken it
suddenly.  Nothing short of a brick wall could have abruptly
brought him up.  Turnbull turned his head slightly and found
breath to say something to MacIan.  MacIan nodded.

Pursuer and pursued were fixed in their distance as they fled,
for some quarter of a mile, when they came to a place where two
or three of the trees grew twistedly together, making a special
obscurity.  Past this place the pursuing policeman went thundering
without thought or hesitation.  But he was pursuing his shadow or
the wind; for Turnbull had put one foot in a crack of the tree
and gone up it as quickly and softly as a cat.  Somewhat more
laboriously but in equal silence the long legs of the Highlander
had followed; and crouching in crucial silence in the cloud of
leaves, they saw the whole posse of their pursuers go by and die
into the dust and mists of the distance.

The white vapour lay, as it often does, in lean and palpable
layers; and even the head of the tree was above it in the
half-daylight, like a green ship swinging on a sea of foam.  But
higher yet behind them, and readier to catch the first coming of
the sun, ran the rampart of the top of the wall, which in their
excitement of escape looked at once indispensable and
unattainable, like the wall of heaven.  Here, however, it was
MacIan's turn to have the advantage; for, though less
light-limbed and feline, he was longer and stronger in the arms.
In two seconds he had tugged up his chin over the wall like a
horizontal bar; the next he sat astride of it, like a horse of
stone.  With his assistance Turnbull vaulted to the same perch,
and the two began cautiously to shift along the wall in the
direction by which they had come, doubling on their tracks to
throw off the last pursuit.  MacIan could not rid himself of the
fancy of bestriding a steed; the long, grey coping of the wall
shot out in front of him, like the long, grey neck of some
nightmare Rosinante.  He had the quaint thought that he and
Turnbull were two knights on one steed on the old shield of the
Templars.

The nightmare of the stone horse was increased by the white fog,
which seemed thicker inside the wall than outside.  They could
make nothing of the enclosure upon which they were partial
trespassers, except that the green and crooked branches of a big
apple-tree came crawling at them out of the mist, like the
tentacles of some green cuttlefish.  Anything would serve,
however, that was likely to confuse their trail, so they both
decided without need of words to use this tree also as a
ladder--a ladder of descent.  When they dropped from the lowest
branch to the ground their stockinged feet felt hard gravel
beneath them.

They had alighted in the middle of a very broad garden path, and
the clearing mist permitted them to see the edge of a
well-clipped lawn.  Though the white vapour was still a veil, it
was like the gauzy veil of a transformation scene in a pantomime;
for through it there glowed shapeless masses of colour, masses
which might be clouds of sunrise or mosaics of gold and crimson,
or ladies robed in ruby and emerald draperies.  As it thinned yet
farther they saw that it was only flowers; but flowers in such
insolent mass and magnificence as can seldom be seen out of the
tropics.  Purple and crimson rhododendrons rose arrogantly, like
rampant heraldic animals against their burning background of
laburnum gold.  The roses were red hot; the clematis was, so to
speak, blue hot.  And yet the mere whiteness of the syringa seemed
the most violent colour of all.  As the golden sunlight gradually
conquered the mists, it had really something of the sensational
sweetness of the slow opening of the gates of Eden.  MacIan, whose
mind was always haunted with such seraphic or titanic parallels,
made some such remark to his companion.  But Turnbull only cursed
and said that it was the back garden of some damnable rich man.

When the last haze had faded from the ordered paths, the open
lawns, and the flaming flower-beds, the two realized, not without
an abrupt re-examination of their position, that they were not
alone in the garden.

Down the centre of the central garden path, preceded by a blue
cloud from a cigarette, was walking a gentleman who evidently
understood all the relish of a garden in the very early morning.
He was a slim yet satisfied figure, clad in a suit of pale-grey
tweed, so subdued that the pattern was imperceptible--a costume
that was casual but not by any means careless.  His face, which
was reflective and somewhat over-refined, was the face of a quite
elderly man, though his stringy hair and moustache were still
quite yellow.  A double eye-glass, with a broad, black ribbon,
drooped from his aquiline nose, and he smiled, as he communed
with himself, with a self-content which was rare and almost
irritating.  The straw panama on his head was many shades shabbier
than his clothes, as if he had caught it up by accident.

It needed the full shock of the huge shadow of MacIan, falling
across his sunlit path, to rouse him from his smiling reverie.
When this had fallen on him he lifted his head a little and
blinked at the intruders with short-sighted benevolence, but with
far less surprise than might have been expected.  He was a
gentleman; that is, he had social presence of mind, whether for
kindness or for insolence.

"Can I do anything for you?" he said, at last.

MacIan bowed.  "You can extend to us your pardon," he said, for he
also came of a whole race of gentlemen--of gentlemen without
shirts to their backs.  "I am afraid we are trespassing.  We have
just come over the wall."

"Over the wall?" repeated the smiling old gentleman, still
without letting his surprise come uppermost.

"I suppose I am not wrong, sir," continued MacIan, "in supposing
that these grounds inside the wall belong to you?"

The man in the panama looked at the ground and smoked
thoughtfully for a few moments, after which he said, with a sort
of matured conviction:

"Yes, certainly; the grounds inside the wall really belong to me,
and the grounds outside the wall, too."

"A large proprietor, I imagine," said Turnbull, with a truculent
eye.

"Yes," answered the old gentleman, looking at him with a steady
smile.  "A large proprietor."

Turnbull's eye grew even more offensive, and he began biting his
red beard; but MacIan seemed to recognize a type with which he
could deal and continued quite easily:

"I am sure that a man like you will not need to be told that one
sees and does a good many things that do not get into the
newspapers.  Things which, on the whole, had better not get into
the newspapers."

The smile of the large proprietor broadened for a moment under
his loose, light moustache, and the other continued with
increased confidence:

"One sometimes wants to have it out with another man.  The police
won't allow it in the streets--and then there's the County
Council--and in the fields even nothing's allowed but posters of
pills.  But in a gentleman's garden, now----"

The strange gentleman smiled again and said, easily enough: "Do
you want to fight?  What do you want to fight about?"

MacIan had understood his man pretty well up to that point; an
instinct common to all men with the aristocratic tradition of
Europe had guided him.  He knew that the kind of man who in his
own back garden wears good clothes and spoils them with a bad hat
is not the kind of man who has an abstract horror of illegal
actions of violence or the evasion of the police.  But a man may
understand ragging and yet be very far from understanding
religious ragging.  This seeming host of theirs might comprehend a
quarrel of husband and lover or a difficulty at cards or even
escape from a pursuing tailor; but it still remained doubtful
whether he would feel the earth fail under him in that earthquake
instant when the Virgin is compared to a goddess of Mesopotamia.
Even MacIan, therefore (whose tact was far from being his strong
point), felt the necessity for some compromise in the mode of
approach.  At last he said, and even then with hesitation:

"We are fighting about God; there can be nothing so important as
that."

The tilted eye-glasses of the old gentleman fell abruptly from
his nose, and he thrust his aristocratic chin so far forward that
his lean neck seemed to shoot out longer like a telescope.

"About God?" he queried, in a key completely new.

"Look here!" cried Turnbull, taking his turn roughly, "I'll tell
you what it's all about.  I think that there's no God.  I take it
that it's nobody's business but mine--or God's, if there is one.
This young gentleman from the Highlands happens to think that
it's his business.  In consequence, he first takes a walking-stick
and smashes my shop; then he takes the same walking-stick and
tries to smash me.  To this I naturally object.  I suggest that if
it comes to that we should both have sticks.  He improves on the
suggestion and proposes that we should both have steel-pointed
sticks.  The police (with characteristic unreasonableness) will
not accept either of our proposals; the result is that we run
about dodging the police and have jumped over our garden wall
into your magnificent garden to throw ourselves on your
magnificent hospitality."

The face of the old gentleman had grown redder and redder during
this address, but it was still smiling; and when he broke out it
was with a kind of guffaw.

"So you really want to fight with drawn swords in my garden," he
asked, "about whether there is really a God?"

"Why not?" said MacIan, with his simple monstrosity of speech;
"all man's worship began when the Garden of Eden was founded."

"Yes, by----!" said Turnbull, with an oath, "and ended when the
Zoological Gardens were founded."

"In this garden!  In my presence!" cried the stranger, stamping up
and down the gravel and choking with laughter," whether there is
a God!"  And he went stamping up and down the garden, making it
echo with his unintelligible laughter.  Then he came back to them
more composed and wiping his eyes.

"Why, how small the world is!" he cried at last.  "I can settle
the whole matter.  Why, I am God!"

And he suddenly began to kick and wave his well-clad legs about
the lawn.

"You are what?" repeated Turnbull, in a tone which is beyond
description.

"Why, God, of course!" answered the other, thoroughly amused.
"How funny it is to think that you have tumbled over a garden
wall and fallen exactly on the right person!  You might have gone
floundering about in all sorts of churches and chapels and
colleges and schools of philosophy looking for some evidence of
the existence of God.  Why, there is no evidence, except seeing
him.  And now you've seen him.  You've seen him dance!"

And the obliging old gentleman instantly stood on one leg without
relaxing at all the grave and cultured benignity of his
expression.

"I understood that this garden----" began the bewildered MacIan.

"Quite so!  Quite so!" said the man on one leg, nodding gravely.
"I said this garden belonged to me and the land outside it.  So
they do.  So does the country beyond that and the sea beyond that
and all the rest of the earth.  So does the moon.  So do the sun
and stars."  And he added, with a smile of apology: "You see, I'm
God."

Turnbull and MacIan looked at him for one moment with a sort of
notion that perhaps he was not too old to be merely playing the
fool.  But after staring steadily for an instant Turnbull saw the
hard and horrible earnestness in the man's eyes behind all his
empty animation.  Then Turnbull looked very gravely at the strict
gravel walls and the gay flower-beds and the long rectangular
red-brick building, which the mist had left evident beyond them.
Then he looked at MacIan.

Almost at the same moment another man came walking quickly round
the regal clump of rhododendrons.  He had the look of a prosperous
banker, wore a good tall silk hat, was almost stout enough to
burst the buttons of a fine frock-coat; but he was talking to
himself, and one of his elbows had a singular outward jerk as he
went by.



XIV. A MUSEUM OF SOULS

The man with the good hat and the jumping elbow went by very
quickly; yet the man with the bad hat, who thought he was God,
overtook him.  He ran after him and jumped over a bed of geraniums
to catch him.

"I beg your Majesty's pardon," he said, with mock humility, "but
here is a quarrel which you ought really to judge."

Then as he led the heavy, silk-hatted man back towards the group,
he caught MacIan's ear in order to whisper: "This poor gentleman
is mad; he thinks he is Edward VII."  At this the self-appointed
Creator slightly winked.  "Of course you won't trust him much;
come to me for everything.  But in my position one has to meet so
many people.  One has to be broadminded."

The big banker in the black frock-coat and hat was standing quite
grave and dignified on the lawn, save for his slight twitch of
one limb, and he did not seem by any means unworthy of the part
which the other promptly forced upon him.

"My dear fellow," said the man in the straw hat, "these two
gentlemen are going to fight a duel of the utmost importance.
Your own royal position and my much humbler one surely indicate
us as the proper seconds.  Seconds--yes, seconds----" and here
the speaker was once more shaken with his old malady of
laughter.

"Yes, you and I are both seconds--and these two gentlemen can
obviously fight in front of us.  You, he-he, are the king.  I am
God; really, they could hardly have better supporters.  They have
come to the right place."

Then Turnbull, who had been staring with a frown at the fresh
turf, burst out with a rather bitter laugh and cried, throwing
his red head in the air:

"Yes, by God, MacIan, I think we have come to the right place!"
And MacIan answered, with an adamantine stupidity:

"Any place is the right place where they will let us do it."

There was a long stillness, and their eyes involuntarily took in
the landscape, as they had taken in all the landscapes of their
everlasting combat; the bright, square garden behind the shop;
the whole lift and leaning of the side of Hampstead Heath; the
little garden of the decadent choked with flowers; the square of
sand beside the sea at sunrise.  They both felt at the same moment
all the breadth and blossoming beauty of that paradise, the
coloured trees, the natural and restful nooks and also the great
wall of stone--more awful than the wall of China--from which no
flesh could flee.

Turnbull was moodily balancing his sword in his hand as the other
spoke; then he started, for a mouth whispered quite close to his
ear.  With a softness incredible in any cat, the huge, heavy man
in the black hat and frock-coat had crept across the lawn from
his own side and was saying in his ear: "Don't trust that second
of yours.  He's mad and not so mad, either; for he frightfully
cunning and sharp.  Don't believe the story he tells you about why
I hate him.  I know the story he'll tell; I overheard it when the
housekeeper was talking to the postman.  It's too long to talk
about now, and I expect we're watched, but----"

Something in Turnbull made him want suddenly to be sick on the
grass; the mere healthy and heathen horror of the unclean; the
mere inhumane hatred of the inhuman state of madness.  He seemed
to hear all round him the hateful whispers of that place,
innumerable as leaves whispering in the wind, and each of them
telling eagerly some evil that had not happened or some terrific
secret which was not true.  All the rationalist and plain man
revolted within him against bowing down for a moment in that
forest of deception and egotistical darkness.  He wanted to blow
up that palace of delusions with dynamite; and in some wild way,
which I will not defend, he tried to do it.

He looked across at MacIan and said: "Oh, I can't stand this!"

"Can't stand what?" asked his opponent, eyeing him doubtfully.

"Shall we say the atmosphere?" replied Turnbull; "one can't use
uncivil expressions even to a--deity.  The fact is, I don't like
having God for my second."

"Sir!" said that being in a state of great offence, "in my
position I am not used to having my favours refused.  Do you know
who I am?"

The editor of _The Atheist_ turned upon him like one who has lost
all patience, and exploded: "Yes, you are God, aren't you?" he
said, abruptly, "why do we have two sets of teeth?"

"Teeth?" spluttered the genteel lunatic; "teeth?"

"Yes," cried Turnbull, advancing on him swiftly and with animated
gestures, "why does teething hurt?  Why do growing pains hurt?  Why
are measles catching?  Why does a rose have thorns?  Why do
rhinoceroses have horns?  Why is the horn on the top of the nose?
Why haven't I a horn on the top of my nose, eh?"  And he struck
the bridge of his nose smartly with his forefinger to indicate
the place of the omission and then wagged the finger menacingly
at the Creator.

"I've often wanted to meet you," he resumed, sternly, after a
pause, "to hold you accountable for all the idiocy and cruelty of
this muddled and meaningless world of yours.  You make a hundred
seeds and only one bears fruit.  You make a million worlds and
only one seems inhabited.  What do you mean by it, eh?  What do you
mean by it?"

The unhappy lunatic had fallen back before this quite novel form
of attack, and lifted his burnt-out cigarette almost like one
warding off a blow.  Turnbull went on like a torrent.

"A man died yesterday in Ealing.  You murdered him.  A girl had the
toothache in Croydon.  You gave it her.  Fifty sailors were drowned
off Selsey Bill.  You scuttled their ship.  What have you got to
say for yourself, eh?"

The representative of omnipotence looked as if he had left most
of these things to his subordinates; he passed a hand over his
wrinkling brow and said in a voice much saner than any he had yet
used:

"Well, if you dislike my assistance, of course--perhaps the other
gentleman----"

"The other gentleman," cried Turnbull, scornfully, "is a
submissive and loyal and obedient gentleman.  He likes the people
who wear crowns, whether of diamonds or of stars.  He believes in
the divine right of kings, and it is appropriate enough that he
should have the king for his second.  But it is not appropriate to
me that I should have God for my second.  God is not good enough.
I dislike and I deny the divine right of kings.  But I dislike
more and I deny more the divine right of divinity."

Then after a pause in which he swallowed his passion, he said to
MacIan: "You have got the right second, anyhow."

The Highlander did not answer, but stood as if thunderstruck with
one long and heavy thought.  Then at last he turned abruptly to
his second in the silk hat and said: "Who are you?"

The man in the silk hat blinked and bridled in affected surprise,
like one who was in truth accustomed to be doubted.

"I am King Edward VII," he said, with shaky arrogance.  "Do you
doubt my word?"

"I do not doubt it in the least," answered MacIan.

"Then, why," said the large man in the silk hat, trembling from
head to foot, "why do you wear your hat before the king?"

"Why should I take it off," retorted MacIan, with equal heat,
"before a usurper?"

Turnbull swung round on his heel.  "Well, really," he said, "I
thought at least you were a loyal subject."

"I am the only loyal subject," answered the Gael.  "For nearly
thirty years I have walked these islands and have not found
another."

"You are always hard to follow," remarked Turnbull, genially,
"and sometimes so much so as to be hardly worth following."

"I alone am loyal," insisted MacIan; "for I alone am in
rebellion.  I am ready at any instant to restore the Stuarts.  I
am ready at any instant to defy the Hanoverian brood--and I defy
it now even when face to face with the actual ruler of the
enormous British Empire!"

And folding his arms and throwing back his lean, hawklike face,
he haughtily confronted the man with the formal frock-coat and
the eccentric elbow.

"What right had you stunted German squires," he cried, "to
interfere in a quarrel between Scotch and English and Irish
gentlemen?  Who made you, whose fathers could not splutter English
while they walked in Whitehall, who made you the judge between
the republic of Sidney and the monarchy of Montrose?  What had
your sires to do with England that they should have the foul
offering of the blood of Derwentwater and the heart of Jimmy
Dawson?  Where are the corpses of Culloden?  Where is the blood of
Lochiel?"  MacIan advanced upon his opponent with a bony and
pointed finger, as if indicating the exact pocket in which the
blood of that Cameron was probably kept; and Edward VII fell back
a few paces in considerable confusion.

"What good have you ever done to us?" he continued in harsher and
harsher accents, forcing the other back towards the flower-beds.
"What good have you ever done, you race of German sausages?  Yards
of barbarian etiquette, to throttle the freedom of aristocracy!
Gas of northern metaphysics to blow up Broad Church bishops like
balloons.  Bad pictures and bad manners and pantheism and the
Albert Memorial.  Go back to Hanover, you humbug?  Go to----"

Before the end of this tirade the arrogance of the monarch had
entirely given way; he had fairly turned tail and was trundling
away down the path.  MacIan strode after him still preaching and
flourishing his large, lean hands.  The other two remained in the
centre of the lawn--Turnbull in convulsions of laughter, the
lunatic in convulsions of disgust.  Almost at the same moment a
third figure came stepping swiftly across the lawn.

The advancing figure walked with a stoop, and yet somehow flung
his forked and narrow beard forward.  That carefully cut and
pointed yellow beard was, indeed, the most emphatic thing about
him.  When he clasped his hands behind him, under the tails of his
coat, he would wag his beard at a man like a big forefinger.  It
performed almost all his gestures; it was more important than the
glittering eye-glasses through which he looked or the beautiful
bleating voice in which he spoke.  His face and neck were of a
lusty red, but lean and stringy; he always wore his expensive
gold-rim eye-glasses slightly askew upon his aquiline nose; and
he always showed two gleaming foreteeth under his moustache, in a
smile so perpetual as to earn the reputation of a sneer.  But for
the crooked glasses his dress was always exquisite; and but for
the smile he was perfectly and perennially depressed.

"Don't you think," said the new-comer, with a sort of
supercilious entreaty, "that we had better all come into
breakfast?  It is such a mistake to wait for breakfast.  It spoils
one's temper so much."

"Quite so," replied Turnbull, seriously.

"There seems almost to have been a little quarrelling here," said
the man with the goatish beard.

"It is rather a long story," said Turnbull, smiling.  "Originally,
it might be called a phase in the quarrel between science and
religion."

The new-comer started slightly, and Turnbull replied to the
question on his face.

"Oh, yes," he said, "I am science!"

"I congratulate you heartily," answered the other, "I am Doctor
Quayle."

Turnbull's eyes did not move, but he realized that the man in the
panama hat had lost all his ease of a landed proprietor and had
withdrawn to a distance of thirty yards, where he stood glaring
with all the contraction of fear and hatred that can stiffen a
cat.

           *                    *                   *

MacIan was sitting somewhat disconsolately on a stump of tree,
his large black head half buried in his large brown hands, when
Turnbull strode up to him chewing a cigarette.  He did not look
up, but his comrade and enemy addressed him like one who must
free himself of his feelings.

"Well, I hope, at any rate," he said, "that you like your
precious religion now.  I hope you like the society of this poor
devil whom your damned tracts and hymns and priests have driven
out of his wits.  Five men in this place, they tell me, five men
in this place who might have been fathers of families, and every
one of them thinks he is God the Father.  Oh! you may talk about
the ugliness of science, but there is no one here who thinks he
is Protoplasm."

"They naturally prefer a bright part," said MacIan, wearily.
"Protoplasm is not worth going mad about."

"At least," said Turnbull, savagely, "it was your Jesus Christ
who started all this bosh about being God."

For one instant MacIan opened the eyes of battle; then his
tightened lips took a crooked smile and he said, quite calmly:

"No, the idea is older; it was Satan who first said that he was
God."

"Then, what," asked Turnbull, very slowly, as he softly picked a
flower, "what is the difference between Christ and Satan?"

"It is quite simple," replied the Highlander.  "Christ descended
into hell; Satan fell into it."

"Does it make much odds?" asked the free-thinker.

"It makes all the odds," said the other.  "One of them wanted to
go up and went down; the other wanted to go down and went up.  A
god can be humble, a devil can only be humbled."

"Why are you always wanting to humble a man?" asked Turnbull,
knitting his brows.  "It affects me as ungenerous."

"Why were you wanting to humble a god when you found him in this
garden?" asked MacIan.

"That was an extreme case of impudence," said Turnbull.

"Granting the man his almighty pretensions, I think he was very
modest," said MacIan.  "It is we who are arrogant, who know we are
only men.  The ordinary man in the street is more of a monster
than that poor fellow; for the man in the street treats himself
as God Almighty when he knows he isn't.  He expects the universe
to turn round him, though he knows he isn't the centre."

"Well," said Turnbull, sitting down on the grass, "this is a
digression, anyhow.  What I want to point out is, that your faith
does end in asylums and my science doesn't."

"Doesn't it, by George!" cried MacIan, scornfully.  "There are a
few men here who are mad on God and a few who are mad on the
Bible.  But I bet there are many more who are simply mad on
madness."

"Do you really believe it?" asked the other.

"Scores of them, I should say," answered MacIan.  "Fellows who
have read medical books or fellows whose fathers and uncles had
something hereditary in their heads--the whole air they breathe
is mad."

"All the same," said Turnbull, shrewdly, "I bet you haven't found
a madman of that sort."

"I bet I have!" cried Evan, with unusual animation.  "I've been
walking about the garden talking to a poor chap all the morning.
He's simply been broken down and driven raving by your damned
science.  Talk about believing one is God--why, it's quite an old,
comfortable, fireside fancy compared with the sort of things this
fellow believes.  He believes that there is a God, but that he is
better than God.  He says God will be afraid to face him.  He says
one is always progressing beyond the best.  He put his arm in mine
and whispered in my ear, as if it were the apocalypse: 'Never
trust a God that you can't improve on.'"

"What can he have meant?" said the atheist, with all his logic
awake.  "Obviously one should not trust any God that one can
improve on."

"It is the way he talks," said MacIan, almost indifferently; "but
he says rummier things than that.  He says that a man's doctor
ought to decide what woman he marries; and he says that children
ought not to be brought up by their parents, because a physical
partiality will then distort the judgement of the educator."

"Oh, dear!" said Turnbull, laughing, "you have certainly come
across a pretty bad case, and incidentally proved your own.  I
suppose some men do lose their wits through science as through
love and other good things."

"And he says," went on MacIan, monotonously, "that he cannot see
why anyone should suppose that a triangle is a three-sided
figure.  He says that on some higher plane----"

Turnbull leapt to his feet as by an electric shock.  "I never
could have believed," he cried, "that you had humour enough to
tell a lie.  You've gone a bit too far, old man, with your little
joke.  Even in a lunatic asylum there can't be anybody who, having
thought about the matter, thinks that a triangle has not got
three sides.  If he exists he must be a new era in human
psychology.  But he doesn't exist."

"I will go and fetch him," said MacIan, calmly; "I left the poor
fellow wandering about by the nasturtium bed."

MacIan vanished, and in a few moments returned, trailing with him
his own discovery among lunatics, who was a slender man with a
fixed smile and an unfixed and rolling head.  He had a goatlike
beard just long enough to be shaken in a strong wind.  Turnbull
sprang to his feet and was like one who is speechless through
choking a sudden shout of laughter.

"Why, you great donkey," he shouted, in an ear-shattering
whisper, "that's not one of the patients at all.  That's one of
the doctors."

Evan looked back at the leering head with the long-pointed beard
and repeated the word inquiringly: "One of the doctors?"

"Oh, you know what I mean," said Turnbull, impatiently.  "The
medical authorities of the place."

Evan was still staring back curiously at the beaming and bearded
creature behind him.

"The mad doctors," said Turnbull, shortly.

"Quite so," said MacIan.

After a rather restless silence Turnbull plucked MacIan by the
elbow and pulled him aside.

"For goodness sake," he said, "don't offend this fellow; he may
be as mad as ten hatters, if you like, but he has us between his
finger and thumb.  This is the very time he appointed to talk with
us about our--well, our exeat."

"But what can it matter?" asked the wondering MacIan.  "He can't
keep us in the asylum.  We're not mad."

"Jackass!" said Turnbull, heartily, "of course we're not mad.  Of
course, if we are medically examined and the thing is thrashed
out, they will find we are not mad.  But don't you see that if the
thing is thrashed out it will mean letters to this reference and
telegrams to that; and at the first word of who we are, we shall
be taken out of a madhouse, where we may smoke, to a jail, where
we mayn't.  No, if we manage this very quietly, he may merely let
us out at the front door as stray revellers.  If there's half an
hour of inquiry, we are cooked."

MacIan looked at the grass frowningly for a few seconds, and then
said in a new, small and childish voice: "I am awfully stupid,
Mr. Turnbull; you must be patient with me."

Turnbull caught Evan's elbow again with quite another gesture.
"Come," he cried, with the harsh voice of one who hides emotion,
"come and let us be tactful in chorus."

The doctor with the pointed beard was already slanting it forward
at a more than usually acute angle, with the smile that expressed
expectancy.

"I hope I do not hurry you, gentlemen," he said, with the
faintest suggestion of a sneer at their hurried consultation,
"but I believe you wanted to see me at half past eleven."

"I am most awfully sorry, Doctor," said Turnbull, with ready
amiability; "I never meant to keep you waiting; but the silly
accident that has landed us in your garden may have some rather
serious consequences to our friends elsewhere, and my friend here
was just drawing my attention to some of them."

"Quite so!  Quite so!" said the doctor, hurriedly.  "If you really
want to put anything before me, I can give you a few moments in
my consulting-room."

He led them rapidly into a small but imposing apartment, which
seemed to be built and furnished entirely in red-varnished wood.
There was one desk occupied with carefully docketed papers; and
there were several chairs of the red-varnished wood--though of
different shape.  All along the wall ran something that might have
been a bookcase, only that it was not filled with books, but with
flat, oblong slabs or cases of the same polished dark-red
consistency.  What those flat wooden cases were they could form no
conception.

The doctor sat down with a polite impatience on his professional
perch; MacIan remained standing, but Turnbull threw himself
almost with luxury into a hard wooden arm-chair.

"This is a most absurd business, Doctor," he said, "and I am
ashamed to take up the time of busy professional men with such
pranks from outside.  The plain fact is, that he and I and a pack
of silly men and girls have organized a game across this part of
the country--a sort of combination of hare and hounds and hide
and seek--I dare say you've heard of it.  We are the hares, and,
seeing your high wall look so inviting, we tumbled over it, and
naturally were a little startled with what we found on the other
side."

"Quite so!" said the doctor, mildly.  "I can understand that you
were startled."

Turnbull had expected him to ask what place was the headquarters
of the new exhilarating game, and who were the male and female
enthusiasts who had brought it to such perfection; in fact,
Turnbull was busy making up these personal and topographical
particulars.  As the doctor did not ask the question, he grew
slightly uneasy, and risked the question: "I hope you will accept
my assurance that the thing was an accident and that no intrusion
was meant."

"Oh, yes, sir," replied the doctor, smiling, "I accept everything
that you say."

"In that case," said Turnbull, rising genially, "we must not
further interrupt your important duties.  I suppose there will be
someone to let us out?"

"No," said the doctor, still smiling steadily and pleasantly,
"there will be no one to let you out."

"Can we let ourselves out, then?" asked Turnbull, in some
surprise.

"Why, of course not," said the beaming scientist; "think how
dangerous that would be in a place like this."

"Then, how the devil are we to get out?" cried Turnbull, losing
his manners for the first time.

"It is a question of time, of receptivity, and treatment," said
the doctor, arching his eyebrows indifferently.  "I do not regard
either of your cases as incurable."

And with that the man of the world was struck dumb, and, as in
all intolerable moments, the word was with the unworldly.

MacIan took one stride to the table, leant across it, and said:
"We can't stop here, we're not mad people!"

"We don't use the crude phrase," said the doctor, smiling at his
patent-leather boots.

"But you _can't_ think us mad," thundered MacIan.  "You never saw
us before.  You know nothing about us.  You haven't even examined
us."

The doctor threw back his head and beard.  "Oh, yes," he said,
"very thoroughly."

"But you can't shut a man up on your mere impressions without
documents or certificates or anything?"

The doctor got languidly to his feet.  "Quite so," he said.  "You
certainly ought to see the documents."

He went across to the curious mock book-shelves and took down one
of the flat mahogany cases.  This he opened with a curious key at
his watch-chain, and laying back a flap revealed a quire of
foolscap covered with close but quite clear writing.  The first
three words were in such large copy-book hand that they caught
the eye even at a distance.  They were: "MacIan, Evan Stuart."

Evan bent his angry eagle face over it; yet something blurred it
and he could never swear he saw it distinctly.  He saw something
that began: "Prenatal influences predisposing to mania.
Grandfather believed in return of the Stuarts.  Mother carried
bone of St. Eulalia with which she touched children in sickness.
Marked religious mania at early age----"

Evan fell back and fought for his speech.  "Oh!" he burst out at
last.  "Oh! if all this world I have walked in had been as sane as
my mother was."

Then he compressed his temples with his hands, as if to crush
them.  And then lifted suddenly a face that looked fresh and
young, as if he had dipped and washed it in some holy well.

"Very well," he cried; "I will take the sour with the sweet.  I
will pay the penalty of having enjoyed God in this monstrous
modern earth that cannot enjoy man or beast.  I will die happy in
your madhouse, only because I know what I know.  Let it be
granted, then--MacIan is a mystic; MacIan is a maniac.  But this
honest shopkeeper and editor whom I have dragged on my inhuman
escapades, you cannot keep him.  He will go free, thank God, he is
not down in any damned document.  His ancestor, I am certain, did
not die at Culloden.  His mother, I swear, had no relics.  Let my
friend out of your front door, and as for me----"

The doctor had already gone across to the laden shelves, and
after a few minutes' short-sighted peering, had pulled down
another parallelogram of dark-red wood.

This also he unlocked on the table, and with the same unerring
egotistic eye on of the company saw the words, written in large
letters: "Turnbull, James."

Hitherto Turnbull himself had somewhat scornfully surrendered his
part in the whole business; but he was too honest and unaffected
not to start at his own name.  After the name, the inscription
appeared to run: "Unique case of Eleutheromania.  Parentage, as so
often in such cases, prosaic and healthy.  Eleutheromaniac signs
occurred early, however, leading him to attach himself to the
individualist Bradlaugh.  Recent outbreak of pure anarchy----"

Turnbull slammed the case to, almost smashing it, and said with a
burst of savage laughter: "Oh! come along, MacIan; I don't care
so much, even about getting out of the madhouse, if only we get
out of this room.  You were right enough, MacIan, when you spoke
about--about mad doctors."

Somehow they found themselves outside in the cool, green garden,
and then, after a stunned silence, Turnbull said: "There is one
thing that was puzzling me all the time, and I understand it
now."

"What do you mean?" asked Evan.

"No man by will or wit," answered Turnbull, "can get out of this
garden; and yet we got into it merely by jumping over a garden
wall.  The whole thing explains itself easily enough.  That
undefended wall was an open trap.  It was a trap laid for two
celebrated lunatics.  They saw us get in right enough.  And they
will see that we do not get out."

Evan gazed at the garden wall, gravely for more than a minute,
and then he nodded without a word.



XV. THE DREAM OF MACIAN

The system of espionage in the asylum was so effective and
complete that in practice the patients could often enjoy a sense
of almost complete solitude.  They could stray up so near to the
wall in an apparently unwatched garden as to find it easy to jump
over it.  They would only have found the error of their
calculations if they had tried to jump.

Under this insulting liberty, in this artificial loneliness, Evan
MacIan was in the habit of creeping out into the garden after
dark--especially upon moonlight nights.  The moon, indeed, was for
him always a positive magnet in a manner somewhat hard to explain
to those of a robuster attitude.  Evidently, Apollo is to the full
as poetical as Diana; but it is not a question of poetry in the
matured and intellectual sense of the word.  It is a question of a
certain solid and childish fancy.  The sun is in the strict and
literal sense invisible; that is to say, that by our bodily eyes
it cannot properly be seen.  But the moon is a much simpler thing;
a naked and nursery sort of thing.  It hangs in the sky quite
solid and quite silver and quite useless; it is one huge
celestial snowball.  It was at least some such infantile facts and
fancies which led Evan again and again during his dehumanized
imprisonment to go out as if to shoot the moon.

He was out in the garden on one such luminous and ghostly night,
when the steady moonshine toned down all the colours of the
garden until almost the strongest tints to be seen were the
strong soft blue of the sky and the large lemon moon.  He was
walking with his face turned up to it in that rather half-witted
fashion which might have excused the error of his keepers; and as
he gazed he became aware of something little and lustrous flying
close to the lustrous orb, like a bright chip knocked off the
moon.  At first he thought it was a mere sparkle or refraction in
his own eyesight; he blinked and cleared his eyes.  Then he
thought it was a falling star; only it did not fall.  It jerked
awkwardly up and down in a way unknown among meteors and
strangely reminiscent of the works of man.  The next moment the
thing drove right across the moon, and from being silver upon
blue, suddenly became black upon silver; then although it passed
the field of light in a flash its outline was unmistakable though
eccentric.  It was a flying ship.

The vessel took one long and sweeping curve across the sky and
came nearer and nearer to MacIan, like a steam-engine coming
round a bend.  It was of pure white steel, and in the moon it
gleamed like the armour of Sir Galahad.  The simile of such
virginity is not inappropriate; for, as it grew larger and larger
and lower and lower, Evan saw that the only figure in it was
robed in white from head to foot and crowned with snow-white
hair, on which the moonshine lay like a benediction.  The figure
stood so still that he could easily have supposed it to be a
statue.  Indeed, he thought it was until it spoke.

"Evan," said the voice, and it spoke with the simple authority of
some forgotten father revisiting his children, "you have remained
here long enough, and your sword is wanted elsewhere."

"Wanted for what?" asked the young man, accepting the monstrous
event with a queer and clumsy naturalness; "what is my sword
wanted for?"

"For all that you hold dear," said the man standing in the
moonlight; "for the thrones of authority and for all ancient
loyalty to law."

Evan looked up at the lunar orb again as if in irrational
appeal--a moon calf bleating to his mother the moon.  But the face
of Luna seemed as witless as his own; there is no help in nature
against the supernatural; and he looked again at the tall marble
figure that might have been made out of solid moonlight.

Then he said in a loud voice: "Who are you?" and the next moment
was seized by a sort of choking terror lest his question should
be answered.  But the unknown preserved an impenetrable silence
for a long space and then only answered: "I must not say who I am
until the end of the world; but I may say what I am.  I am the
law."

And he lifted his head so that the moon smote full upon his
beautiful and ancient face.

The face was the face of a Greek god grown old, but not grown
either weak or ugly; there was nothing to break its regularity
except a rather long chin with a cleft in it, and this rather
added distinction than lessened beauty.  His strong, well-opened
eyes were very brilliant but quite colourless like steel.

MacIan was one of those to whom a reverence and self-submission
in ritual come quite easy, and are ordinary things.  It was not
artificial in him to bend slightly to this solemn apparition or
to lower his voice when he said: "Do you bring me some message?"

"I do bring you a message," answered the man of moon and marble.
"The king has returned."

Evan did not ask for or require any explanation.  "I suppose you
can take me to the war," he said, and the silent silver figure
only bowed its head again.  MacIan clambered into the silver boat,
and it rose upward to the stars.

To say that it rose to the stars is no mere metaphor, for the sky
had cleared to that occasional and astonishing transparency in
which one can see plainly both stars and moon.

As the white-robed figure went upward in his white chariot, he
said quite quietly to Evan: "There is an answer to all the folly
talked about equality.  Some stars are big and some small; some
stand still and some circle around them as they stand.  They can
be orderly, but they cannot be equal."

"They are all very beautiful," said Evan, as if in doubt.

"They are all beautiful," answered the other, "because each is in
his place and owns his superior.  And now England will be
beautiful after the same fashion.  The earth will be as beautiful
as the heavens, because our kings have come back to us."

"The Stuart----" began Evan, earnestly.

"Yes," answered the old man, "that which has returned is Stuart
and yet older than Stuart.  It is Capet and Plantagenet and
Pendragon.  It is all that good old time of which proverbs tell,
that golden reign of Saturn against which gods and men were
rebels.  It is all that was ever lost by insolence and overwhelmed
in rebellion.  It is your own forefather, MacIan with the broken
sword, bleeding without hope at Culloden.  It is Charles refusing
to answer the questions of the rebel court.  It is Mary of the
magic face confronting the gloomy and grasping peers and the
boorish moralities of Knox.  It is Richard, the last Plantagenet,
giving his crown to Bolingbroke as to a common brigand.  It is
Arthur, overwhelmed in Lyonesse by heathen armies and dying in
the mist, doubtful if ever he shall return."

"But now----" said Evan, in a low voice.

"But now!" said the old man; "he has returned."

"Is the war still raging?" asked MacIan.

"It rages like the pit itself beyond the sea whither I am taking
you," answered the other.  "But in England the king enjoys his own
again.  The people are once more taught and ruled as is best; they
are happy knights, happy squires, happy servants, happy serfs, if
you will; but free at last of that load of vexation and lonely
vanity which was called being a citizen."

"Is England, indeed, so secure?" asked Evan.

"Look out and see," said the guide.  "I fancy you have seen this
place before."

They were driving through the air towards one region of the sky
where the hollow of night seemed darkest and which was quite
without stars.  But against this black background there sprang up,
picked out in glittering silver, a dome and a cross.  It seemed
that it was really newly covered with silver, which in the strong
moonlight was like white flame.  But, however, covered or painted,
Evan had no difficult in knowing the place again.  He saw the
great thoroughfare that sloped upward to the base of its huge
pedestal of steps.  And he wondered whether the little shop was
still by the side of it and whether its window had been mended.

As the flying ship swept round the dome he observed other
alterations.  The dome had been redecorated so as to give it a
more solemn and somewhat more ecclesiastical note; the ball was
draped or destroyed, and round the gallery, under the cross, ran
what looked like a ring of silver statues, like the little leaden
images that stood round the hat of Louis XI.  Round the second
gallery, at the base of the dome, ran a second rank of such
images, and Evan thought there was another round the steps below.
When they came closer he saw that they were figures in complete
armour of steel or silver, each with a naked sword, point upward;
and then he saw one of the swords move.  These were not statues
but an armed order of chivalry thrown in three circles round the
cross.  MacIan drew in his breath, as children do at anything they
think utterly beautiful.  For he could imagine nothing that so
echoed his own visions of pontifical or chivalric art as this
white dome sitting like a vast silver tiara over London, ringed
with a triple crown of swords.

As they went sailing down Ludgate Hill, Evan saw that the state
of the streets fully answered his companion's claim about the
reintroduction of order.  All the old blackcoated bustle with its
cockney vivacity and vulgarity had disappeared.  Groups of
labourers, quietly but picturesquely clad, were passing up and
down in sufficiently large numbers; but it required but a few
mounted men to keep the streets in order.  The mounted men were
not common policemen, but knights with spurs and plume whose
smooth and splendid armour glittered like diamond rather than
steel.  Only in one place--at the corner of Bouverie Street--did
there appear to be a moment's confusion, and that was due to
hurry rather than resistance.  But one old grumbling man did not
get out of the way quick enough, and the man on horseback struck
him, not severely, across the shoulders with the flat of his
sword.

"The soldier had no business to do that," said MacIan, sharply.
"The old man was moving as quickly as he could."

"We attach great importance to discipline in the streets," said
the man in white, with a slight smile.

"Discipline is not so important as justice," said MacIan.

The other did not answer.

Then after a swift silence that took them out across St. James's
Park, he said: "The people must be taught to obey; they must
learn their own ignorance.  And I am not sure," he continued,
turning his back on Evan and looking out of the prow of the ship
into the darkness, "I am not sure that I agree with your little
maxim about justice.  Discipline for the whole society is surely
more important than justice to an individual."

Evan, who was also leaning over the edge, swung round with
startling suddenness and stared at the other's back.

"Discipline for society----" he repeated, very staccato, "more
important--justice to individual?"

Then after a long silence he called out: "Who and what are you?"

"I am an angel," said the white-robed figure, without turning
round.

"You are not a Catholic," said MacIan.

The other seemed to take no notice, but reverted to the main
topic.

"In our armies up in heaven we learn to put a wholesome fear into
subordinates."

MacIan sat craning his neck forward with an extraordinary and
unaccountable eagerness.

"Go on!" he cried, twisting and untwisting his long, bony
fingers, "go on!"

"Besides," continued he, in the prow, "you must allow for a
certain high spirit and haughtiness in the superior type."

"Go on!" said Evan, with burning eyes.

"Just as the sight of sin offends God," said the unknown, "so
does the sight of ugliness offend Apollo.  The beautiful and
princely must, of necessity, be impatient with the squalid
and----"

"Why, you great fool!" cried MacIan, rising to the top of his
tremendous stature, "did you think I would have doubted only for
that rap with a sword?  I know that noble orders have bad knights,
that good knights have bad tempers, that the Church has rough
priests and coarse cardinals; I have known it ever since I was
born.  You fool! you had only to say, 'Yes, it is rather a shame,'
and I should have forgotten the affair.  But I saw on your mouth
the twitch of your infernal sophistry; I knew that something was
wrong with you and your cathedrals.  Something is wrong;
everything is wrong.  You are not an angel.  That is not a church.
It is not the rightful king who has come home."

"That is unfortunate," said the other, in a quiet but hard voice,
"because you are going to see his Majesty."

"No," said MacIan, "I am going to jump over the side."

"Do you desire death?"

"No," said Evan, quite composedly, "I desire a miracle."

"From whom do you ask it?  To whom do you appeal?" said his
companion, sternly.  "You have betrayed the king, renounced his
cross on the cathedral, and insulted an archangel."

"I appeal to God," said Evan, and sprang up and stood upon the
edge of the swaying ship.

The being in the prow turned slowly round; he looked at Evan with
eyes which were like two suns, and put his hand to his mouth just
too late to hide an awful smile.

"And how do you know," he said, "how do you know that I am not
God?"

MacIan screamed.  "Ah!" he cried.  "Now I know who you really are.
You are not God.  You are not one of God's angels.  But you were
once."

The being's hand dropped from his mouth and Evan dropped out of
the car.



XVI. THE DREAM OF TURNBULL

Turnbull was walking rather rampantly up and down the garden on a
gusty evening chewing his cigar and in that mood when every man
suppresses an instinct to spit.  He was not, as a rule, a man much
acquainted with moods; and the storms and sunbursts of MacIan's
soul passed before him as an impressive but unmeaning panorama,
like the anarchy of Highland scenery.  Turnbull was one of those
men in whom a continuous appetite and industry of the intellect
leave the emotions very simple and steady.  His heart was in the
right place; but he was quite content to leave it there.  It was
his head that was his hobby.  His mornings and evenings were
marked not by impulses or thirsty desires, not by hope or by
heart-break; they were filled with the fallacies he had detected,
the problems he had made plain, the adverse theories he had
wrestled with and thrown, the grand generalizations he had
justified.  But even the cheerful inner life of a logician may be
upset by a lunatic asylum, to say nothing of whiffs of memory
from a lady in Jersey, and the little red-bearded man on this
windy evening was in a dangerous frame of mind.

Plain and positive as he was, the influence of earth and sky may
have been greater on him than he imagined; and the weather that
walked the world at that moment was as red and angry as Turnbull.
Long strips and swirls of tattered and tawny cloud were dragged
downward to the west exactly as torn red raiment would be
dragged.  And so strong and pitiless was the wind that it whipped
away fragments of red-flowering bushes or of copper beech, and
drove them also across the garden, a drift of red leaves, like
the leaves of autumn, as in parody of the red and driven rags of
cloud.

There was a sense in earth and heaven as of everything breaking
up, and all the revolutionist in Turnbull rejoiced that it was
breaking up.  The trees were breaking up under the wind, even in
the tall strength of their bloom: the clouds were breaking up and
losing even their large heraldic shapes.  Shards and shreds of
copper cloud split off continually and floated by themselves, and
for some reason the truculent eye of Turnbull was attracted to
one of these careering cloudlets, which seemed to him to career
in an exaggerated manner.  Also it kept its shape, which is
unusual with clouds shaken off; also its shape was of an odd
sort.

Turnbull continued to stare at it, and in a little time occurred
that crucial instant when a thing, however incredible, is
accepted as a fact.  The copper cloud was tumbling down towards
the earth, like some gigantic leaf from the copper beeches.  And
as it came nearer it was evident, first, that it was not a cloud,
and, second, that it was not itself of the colour of copper;
only, being burnished like a mirror, it had reflected the
red-brown colours of the burning clouds.  As the thing whirled
like a windswept leaf down towards the wall of the garden it was
clear that it was some sort of air-ship made of metal, and
slapping the air with big broad fins of steel.  When it came about
a hundred feet above the garden, a shaggy, lean figure leapt up
in it, almost black against the bronze and scarlet of the west,
and, flinging out a kind of hook or anchor, caught on to the
green apple-tree just under the wall; and from that fixed holding
ground the ship swung in the red tempest like a captive balloon.

While our friend stood frozen for an instant by his astonishment,
the queer figure in the airy car tipped the vehicle almost upside
down by leaping over the side of it, seemed to slide or drop down
the rope like a monkey, and alighted (with impossible precision
and placidity) seated on the edge of the wall, over which he
kicked and dangled his legs as he grinned at Turnbull.  The wind
roared in the trees yet more ruinous and desolate, the red tails
of the sunset were dragged downward like red dragons sucked down
to death, and still on the top of the asylum wall sat the
sinister figure with the grimace, swinging his feet in tune with
the tempest; while above him, at the end of its tossing or
tightened cord, the enormous iron air-ship floated as light and
as little noticed as a baby's balloon upon its string.

Turnbull's first movement after sixty motionless seconds was to
turn round and look at the large, luxuriant parallelogram of the
garden and the long, low rectangular building beyond.  There was
not a soul or a stir of life within sight.  And he had a quite
meaningless sensation, as if there never really had been any one
else there except he since the foundation of the world.

Stiffening in himself the masculine but mirthless courage of the
atheist, he drew a little nearer to the wall and, catching the
man at a slightly different angle of the evening light, could see
his face and figure quite plain.  Two facts about him stood out in
the picked colours of some piratical schoolboy's story.  The first
was that his lean brown body was bare to the belt of his loose
white trousers; the other that through hygiene, affectation, or
whatever other cause, he had a scarlet handkerchief tied tightly
but somewhat aslant across his brow.  After these two facts had
become emphatic, others appeared sufficiently important.  One was
that under the scarlet rag the hair was plentiful, but white as
with the last snows of mortality.  Another was that under the mop
of white and senile hair the face was strong, handsome, and
smiling, with a well-cut profile and a long cloven chin.  The
length of this lower part of the face and the strange cleft in it
(which gave the man, in quite another sense from the common one,
a double chin) faintly spoilt the claim of the face to absolute
regularity, but it greatly assisted it in wearing the expression
of half-smiling and half-sneering arrogance with which it was
staring at all the stones, all the flowers, but especially at the
solitary man.

"What do you want?" shouted Turnbull.

"I want you, Jimmy," said the eccentric man on the wall, and with
the very word he had let himself down with a leap on to the
centre of the lawn, where he bounded once literally like an
India-rubber ball and then stood grinning with his legs astride.
The only three facts that Turnbull could now add to his inventory
were that the man had an ugly-looking knife swinging at his
trousers belt, that his brown feet were as bare as his bronzed
trunk and arms, and that his eyes had a singular bleak brilliancy
which was of no particular colour.

"Excuse my not being in evening dress," said the newcomer with an
urbane smile.  "We scientific men, you know--I have to work my own
engines--electrical engineer--very hot work."

"Look here," said Turnbull, sturdily clenching his fists in his
trousers pockets, "I am bound to expect lunatics inside these
four walls; but I do bar their coming from outside, bang out of
the sunset clouds."

"And yet you came from the outside, too, Jim," said the stranger
in a voice almost affectionate.

"What do you want?" asked Turnbull, with an explosion of temper
as sudden as a pistol shot.

"I have already told you," said the man, lowering his voice and
speaking with evident sincerity; "I want you."

"What do you want with me?"

"I want exactly what you want," said the new-comer with a new
gravity.  "I want the Revolution."

Turnbull looked at the fire-swept sky and the wind-stricken
woodlands, and kept on repeating the word voicelessly to
himself--the word that did indeed so thoroughly express his mood
of rage as it had been among those red clouds and rocking
tree-tops.  "Revolution!" he said to himself.  "The
Revolution--yes, that is what I want right enough--anything, so
long as it is a Revolution."

To some cause he could never explain he found himself completing
the sentence on the top of the wall, having automatically
followed the stranger so far.  But when the stranger silently
indicated the rope that led to the machine, he found himself
pausing and saying: "I can't leave MacIan behind in this den."

"We are going to destroy the Pope and all the kings," said the
new-comer.  "Would it be wiser to take him with us?"

Somehow the muttering Turnbull found himself in the flying ship
also, and it swung up into the sunset.

"All the great rebels have been very little rebels," said the man
with the red scarf.  "They have been like fourth-form boys who
sometimes venture to hit a fifth-form boy.  That was all the worth
of their French Revolution and regicide.  The boys never really
dared to defy the schoolmaster."

"Whom do you mean by the schoolmaster?" asked Turnbull.

"You know whom I mean," answered the strange man, as he lay back
on cushions and looked up into the angry sky.

They seemed rising into stronger and stronger sunlight, as if it
were sunrise rather than sunset.  But when they looked down at the
earth they saw it growing darker and darker.  The lunatic asylum
in its large rectangular grounds spread below them in a
foreshortened and infantile plan, and looked for the first time
the grotesque thing that it was.  But the clear colours of the
plan were growing darker every moment.  The masses of rose or
rhododendron deepened from crimson to violet.  The maze of gravel
pathways faded from gold to brown.  By the time they had risen a
few hundred feet higher nothing could be seen of that darkening
landscape except the lines of lighted windows, each one of which,
at least, was the light of one lost intelligence.  But on them as
they swept upward better and braver winds seemed to blow, and on
them the ruby light of evening seemed struck, and splashed like
red spurts from the grapes of Dionysus.  Below them the fallen
lights were literally the fallen stars of servitude.  And above
them all the red and raging clouds were like the leaping flags of
liberty.

The man with the cloven chin seemed to have a singular power of
understanding thoughts; for, as Turnbull felt the whole universe
tilt and turn over his head, the stranger said exactly the right
thing.

"Doesn't it seem as if everything were being upset?" said he;
"and if once everything is upset, He will be upset on top of it."

Then, as Turnbull made no answer, his host continued:

"That is the really fine thing about space.  It is topsy-turvy.
You have only to climb far enough towards the morning star to
feel that you are coming down to it.  You have only to dive deep
enough into the abyss to feel that you are rising.  That is the
only glory of this universe--it is a giddy universe."

Then, as Turnbull was still silent, he added:

"The heavens are full of revolution--of the real sort of
revolution.  All the high things are sinking low and all the big
things looking small.  All the people who think they are aspiring
find they are falling head foremost.  And all the people who think
they are condescending find they are climbing up a precipice.
That is the intoxication of space.  That is the only joy of
eternity--doubt.  There is only one pleasure the angels can
possibly have in flying, and that is, that they do not know
whether they are on their head or their heels."

Then, finding his companion still mute, he fell himself into a
smiling and motionless meditation, at the end of which he said
suddenly:

"So MacIan converted you?"

Turnbull sprang up as if spurning the steel car from under his
feet.  "Converted me!" he cried.  "What the devil do you mean?  I
have known him for a month, and I have not retracted a
single----"

"This Catholicism is a curious thing," said the man of the cloven
chin in uninterrupted reflectiveness, leaning his elegant elbows
over the edge of the vessel; "it soaks and weakens men without
their knowing it, just as I fear it has soaked and weakened you."

Turnbull stood in an attitude which might well have meant
pitching the other man out of the flying ship.

"I am an atheist," he said, in a stifled voice.  "I have always
been an atheist.  I am still an atheist."  Then, addressing the
other's indolent and indifferent back, he cried: "In God's name
what do you mean?"

And the other answered without turning round:

"I mean nothing in God's name."

Turnbull spat over the edge of the car and fell back furiously
into his seat.

The other continued still unruffled, and staring over the edge
idly as an angler stares down at a stream.

"The truth is that we never thought that you could have been
caught," he said; "we counted on you as the one red-hot
revolutionary left in the world.  But, of course, these men like
MacIan are awfully clever, especially when they pretend to be
stupid."

Turnbull leapt up again in a living fury and cried: "What have I
got to do with MacIan?  I believe all I ever believed, and
disbelieve all I ever disbelieved.  What does all this mean, and
what do you want with me here?"

Then for the first time the other lifted himself from the edge of
the car and faced him.

"I have brought you here," he answered, "to take part in the last
war of the world."

"The last war!" repeated Turnbull, even in his dazed state a
little touchy about such a dogma; "how do you know it will be the
last?"

The man laid himself back in his reposeful attitude, and said:

"It is the last war, because if it does not cure the world for
ever, it will destroy it."

"What do you mean?"

"I only mean what you mean," answered the unknown in a temperate
voice.  "What was it that you always meant on those million and
one nights when you walked outside your Ludgate Hill shop and
shook your hand in the air?"

"Still I do not see," said Turnbull, stubbornly.

"You will soon," said the other, and abruptly bent downward one
iron handle of his huge machine.  The engine stopped, stooped, and
dived almost as deliberately as a man bathing; in their downward
rush they swept within fifty yards of a big bulk of stone that
Turnbull knew only too well.  The last red anger of the sunset was
ended; the dome of heaven was dark; the lanes of flaring light in
the streets below hardly lit up the base of the building.  But he
saw that it was St. Paul's Cathedral, and he saw that on the top
of it the ball was still standing erect, but the cross was
stricken and had fallen sideways.  Then only he cared to look down
into the streets, and saw that they were inflamed with uproar and
tossing passions.

"We arrive at a happy moment," said the man steering the ship.
"The insurgents are bombarding the city, and a cannon-ball has
just hit the cross.  Many of the insurgents are simple people, and
they naturally regard it as a happy omen."

"Quite so," said Turnbull, in a rather colourless voice.

"Yes," replied the other.  "I thought you would be glad to see
your prayer answered.  Of course I apologize for the word prayer."

"Don't mention it," said Turnbull.

The flying ship had come down upon a sort of curve, and was now
rising again.  The higher and higher it rose the broader and
broader became the scenes of flame and desolation underneath.

Ludgate Hill indeed had been an uncaptured and comparatively
quiet height, altered only by the startling coincidence of the
cross fallen awry.  All the other thoroughfares on all sides of
that hill were full of the pulsation and the pain of battle, full
of shaking torches and shouting faces.  When at length they had
risen high enough to have a bird's-eye view of the whole
campaign, Turnbull was already intoxicated.  He had smelt
gunpowder, which was the incense of his own revolutionary
religion.

"Have the people really risen?" he asked, breathlessly.  "What are
they fighting about?"

"The programme is rather elaborate," said his entertainer with
some indifference.  "I think Dr. Hertz drew it up."

Turnbull wrinkled his forehead.  "Are all the poor people with the
Revolution?" he asked.

The other shrugged his shoulders.  "All the instructed and
class-conscious part of them without exception," he replied.
"There were certainly a few districts; in fact, we are passing
over them just now----"

Turnbull looked down and saw that the polished car was literally
lit up from underneath by the far-flung fires from below.
Underneath whole squares and solid districts were in flames, like
prairies or forests on fire.

"Dr. Hertz has convinced everybody," said Turnbull's cicerone in
a smooth voice, "that nothing can really be done with the real
slums.  His celebrated maxim has been quite adopted.  I mean the
three celebrated sentences: 'No man should be unemployed.  Employ
the employables.  Destroy the unemployables.'"

There was a silence, and then Turnbull said in a rather strained
voice: "And do I understand that this good work is going on under
here?"

"Going on splendidly," replied his companion in the heartiest
voice.  "You see, these people were much too tired and weak even
to join the social war.  They were a definite hindrance to it."

"And so you are simply burning them out?"

"It _does_ seem absurdly simple," said the man, with a beaming
smile, "when one thinks of all the worry and talk about helping a
hopeless slave population, when the future obviously was only
crying to be rid of them.  There are happy babes unborn ready to
burst the doors when these drivellers are swept away."

"Will you permit me to say," said Turnbull, after reflection,
"that I don't like all this?"

"And will you permit me to say," said the other, with a snap,
"that I don't like Mr. Evan MacIan?"

Somewhat to the speaker's surprise this did not inflame the
sensitive sceptic; he had the air of thinking thoroughly, and
then he said: "No, I don't think it's my friend MacIan that
taught me that.  I think I should always have said that I don't
like this.  These people have rights."

"Rights!" repeated the unknown in a tone quite indescribable.
Then he added with a more open sneer: "Perhaps they also have
souls."

"They have lives!" said Turnbull, sternly; "that is quite enough
for me.  I understood you to say that you thought life sacred."

"Yes, indeed!" cried his mentor with a sort of idealistic
animation.  "Yes, indeed!  Life is sacred--but lives are not
sacred.  We are improving Life by removing lives.  Can you, as a
free-thinker, find any fault in that?"

"Yes," said Turnbull with brevity.

"Yet you applaud tyrannicide," said the stranger with
rationalistic gaiety.  "How inconsistent!  It really comes to
this: You approve of taking away life from those to whom it is a
triumph and a pleasure.  But you will not take away life from
those to whom it is a burden and a toil."

Turnbull rose to his feet in the car with considerable
deliberation, but his face seemed oddly pale.  The other went on
with enthusiasm.

"Life, yes, Life is indeed sacred!" he cried; "but new lives for
old!  Good lives for bad!  On that very place where now there
sprawls one drunken wastrel of a pavement artist more or less
wishing he were dead--on that very spot there shall in the future
be living pictures; there shall be golden girls and boys leaping
in the sun."

Turnbull, still standing up, opened his lips.  "Will you put me
down, please?" he said, quite calmly, like on stopping an
omnibus.

"Put you down--what do you mean?" cried his leader.  "I am taking
you to the front of the revolutionary war, where you will be one
of the first of the revolutionary leaders."

"Thank you," replied Turnbull with the same painful constraint.
"I have heard about your revolutionary war, and I think on the
whole that I would rather be anywhere else."

"Do you want to be taken to a monastery," snarled the other,
"with MacIan and his winking Madonnas."

"I want to be taken to a madhouse," said Turnbull distinctly,
giving the direction with a sort of precision.  "I want to go back
to exactly the same lunatic asylum from which I came."

"Why?" asked the unknown.

"Because I want a little sane and wholesome society," answered
Turnbull.

There was a long and peculiar silence, and then the man driving
the flying machine said quite coolly: "I won't take you back."

And then Turnbull said equally coolly: "Then I'll jump out of the
car."

The unknown rose to his full height, and the expression in his
eyes seemed to be made of ironies behind ironies, as two mirrors
infinitely reflect each other.  At last he said, very gravely: "Do
you think I am the devil?"

"Yes," said Turnbull, violently.  "For I think the devil is a
dream, and so are you.  I don't believe in you or your flying ship
or your last fight of the world.  It is all a nightmare.  I say as
a fact of dogma and faith that it is all a nightmare.  And I will
be a martyr for my faith as much as St. Catherine, for I will
jump out of this ship and risk waking up safe in bed."

After swaying twice with the swaying vessel he dived over the
side as one dives into the sea.  For some incredible moments stars
and space and planets seemed to shoot up past him as the sparks
fly upward; and yet in that sickening descent he was full of some
unnatural happiness.  He could connect it with no idea except one
that half escaped him--what Evan had said of the difference
between Christ and Satan; that it was by Christ's own choice that
He descended into hell.

When he again realized anything, he was lying on his elbow on the
lawn of the lunatic asylum, and the last red of the sunset had
not yet disappeared.



XVII. THE IDIOT

Evan MacIan was standing a few yards off looking at him in
absolute silence.

He had not the moral courage to ask MacIan if there had been
anything astounding in the manner of his coming there, nor did
MacIan seem to have any question to ask, or perhaps any need to
ask it.  The two men came slowly towards each other, and found the
same expression on each other's faces.  Then, for the first time
in all their acquaintance, they shook hands.

Almost as if this were a kind of unconscious signal, it brought
Dr. Quayle bounding out of a door and running across the lawn.

"Oh, there you are!" he exclaimed with a relieved giggle.  "Will
you come inside, please?  I want to speak to you both."

They followed him into his shiny wooden office where their
damning record was kept.  Dr. Quayle sat down on a swivel chair
and swung round to face them.  His carved smile had suddenly
disappeared.

"I will be plain with you gentlemen," he said, abruptly; "you
know quite well we do our best for everybody here.  Your cases
have been under special consideration, and the Master himself has
decided that you ought to be treated specially and--er--under
somewhat simpler conditions."

"You mean treated worse, I suppose," said Turnbull, gruffly.

The doctor did not reply, and MacIan said: "I expected this."  His
eyes had begun to glow.

The doctor answered, looking at his desk and playing with a key:
"Well, in certain cases that give anxiety--it is often
better----"

"Give anxiety," said Turnbull, fiercely.  "Confound your
impudence!  What do you mean?  You imprison two perfectly sane men
in a madhouse because you have made up a long word.  They take it
in good temper, walk and talk in your garden like monks who have
found a vocation, are civil even to you, you damned druggists'
hack!  Behave not only more sanely than any of your patients, but
more sanely than half the sane men outside, and you have the
soul-stifling cheek to say that they give anxiety."

"The head of the asylum has settled it all," said Dr. Quayle,
still looking down.

MacIan took one of his immense strides forward and stood over the
doctor with flaming eyes.

"If the head has settled it let the head announce it," he said.
"I won't take it from you.  I believe you to be a low, gibbering
degenerate.  Let us see the head of the asylum."

"See the head of the asylum," repeated Dr. Quayle.  "Certainly
not."

The tall Highlander, bending over him, put one hand on his
shoulder with fatherly interest.

"You don't seem to appreciate the peculiar advantages of my
position as a lunatic," he said.  "I could kill you with my left
hand before such a rat as you could so much as squeak.  And I
wouldn't be hanged for it."

"I certainly agree with Mr. MacIan," said Turnbull with sobriety
and perfect respectfulness, "that you had better let us see the
head of the institution."

Dr. Quayle got to his feet in a mixture of sudden hysteria and
clumsy presence of mind.

"Oh, certainly," he said with a weak laugh.  "You can see the head
of the asylum if you particularly want to."  He almost ran out of
the room, and the two followed swiftly on his flying coat tails.
He knocked at an ordinary varnished door in the corridor.  When a
voice said, "Come in," MacIan's breath went hissing back through
his teeth into his chest.  Turnbull was more impetuous, and opened
the door.

It was a neat and well-appointed room entirely lined with a
medical library.  At the other end of it was a ponderous and
polished desk with an incandescent lamp on it, the light of which
was just sufficient to show a slender, well-bred figure in an
ordinary medical black frock-coat, whose head, quite silvered
with age, was bent over neat piles of notes.  This gentleman
looked up for an instant as they entered, and the lamplight fell
on his glittering spectacles and long, clean-shaven face--a face
which would have been simply like an aristocrat's but that a
certain lion poise of the head and long cleft in the chin made it
look more like a very handsome actor's.  It was only for a flash
that his face was thus lifted.  Then he bent his silver head over
his notes once more, and said, without looking up again:

"I told you, Dr. Quayle, that these men were to go to cells B and
C."

Turnbull and MacIan looked at each other, and said more than they
could ever say with tongues or swords.  Among other things they
said that to that particular Head of the institution it was a
waste of time to appeal, and they followed Dr. Quayle out of the
room.

The instant they stepped out into the corridor four sturdy
figures stepped from four sides, pinioned them, and ran them
along the galleries.  They might very likely have thrown their
captors right and left had they been inclined to resist, but for
some nameless reason they were more inclined to laugh.  A mixture
of mad irony with childish curiosity made them feel quite
inclined to see what next twist would be taken by their imbecile
luck.  They were dragged down countless cold avenues lined with
glazed tiles, different only in being of different lengths and
set at different angles.  They were so many and so monotonous that
to escape back by them would have been far harder than fleeing
from the Hampton Court maze.  Only the fact that windows grew
fewer, coming at longer intervals, and the fact that when the
windows did come they seemed shadowed and let in less light,
showed that they were winding into the core or belly of some
enormous building.  After a little time the glazed corridors began
to be lit by electricity.

At last, when they had walked nearly a mile in those white and
polished tunnels, they came with quite a shock to the futile
finality of a cul-de-sac.  All that white and weary journey ended
suddenly in an oblong space and a blank white wall.  But in the
white wall there were two iron doors painted white on which were
written, respectively, in neat black capitals B and C.

"You go in here, sir," said the leader of the officials, quite
respectfully, "and you in here."

But before the doors had clanged upon their dazed victims, MacIan
had been able to say to Turnbull with a strange drawl of
significance: "I wonder who A is."

Turnbull made an automatic struggle before he allowed himself to
be thrown into the cell.  Hence it happened that he was the last
to enter, and was still full of the exhilaration of the
adventures for at least five minutes after the echo of the
clanging door had died away.

Then, when silence had sunk deep and nothing happened for two and
a half hours, it suddenly occurred to him that this was the end
of his life.  He was hidden and sealed up in this little crack of
stone until the flesh should fall off his bones.  He was dead, and
the world had won.

His cell was of an oblong shape, but very long in comparison with
its width.  It was just wide enough to permit the arms to be fully
extended with the dumb-bells, which were hung up on the left
wall, very dusty.  It was, however, long enough for a man to walk
one thirty-fifth part of a mile if he traversed it entirely.  On
the same principle a row of fixed holes, quite close together,
let in to the cells by pipes what was alleged to be the freshest
air.  For these great scientific organizers insisted that a man
should be healthy even if he was miserable.  They provided a walk
long enough to give him exercise and holes large enough to give
him oxygen.  There their interest in human nature suddenly ceased.
It seemed never to have occurred to them that the benefit of
exercise belongs partly to the benefit of liberty.  They had not
entertained the suggestion that the open air is only one of the
advantages of the open sky.  They administered air in secret, but
in sufficient doses, as if it were a medicine.  They suggested
walking, as if no man had ever felt inclined to walk.  Above all,
the asylum authorities insisted on their own extraordinary
cleanliness.  Every morning, while Turnbull was still half asleep
on his iron bedstead which was lifted half-way up the wall and
clamped to it with iron, four sluices or metal mouths opened
above him at the four corners of the chamber and washed it white
of any defilement.  Turnbull's solitary soul surged up against
this sickening daily solemnity.

"I am buried alive!" he cried, bitterly; "they have hidden me
under mountains.  I shall be here till I rot.  Why the blazes
should it matter to them whether I am dirty or clean."

Every morning and evening an iron hatchway opened in his oblong
cell, and a brown hairy hand or two thrust in a plate of
perfectly cooked lentils and a big bowl of cocoa.  He was not
underfed any more than he was underexercised or asphyxiated.  He
had ample walking space, ample air, ample and even filling food.
The only objection was that he had nothing to walk towards,
nothing to feast about, and no reason whatever for drawing the
breath of life.

Even the shape of his cell especially irritated him.  It was a
long, narrow parallelogram, which had a flat wall at one end and
ought to have had a flat wall at the other; but that end was
broken by a wedge or angle of space, like the prow of a ship.
After three days of silence and cocoa, this angle at the end
began to infuriate Turnbull.  It maddened him to think that two
lines came together and pointed at nothing.  After the fifth day
he was reckless, and poked his head into the corner.  After
twenty-five days he almost broke his head against it.  Then he
became quite cool and stupid again, and began to examine it like
a sort of Robinson Crusoe.

Almost unconsciously it was his instinct to examine outlets, and
he found himself paying particular attention to the row of holes
which let in the air into his last house of life.  He soon
discovered that these air-holes were all the ends and mouths of
long leaden tubes which doubtless carried air from some remote
watering-place near Margate.  One evening while he was engaged in
the fifth investigation he noticed something like twilight in one
of these dumb mouths, as compared with the darkness of the
others.  Thrusting his finger in as far as it would go, he found a
hole and flapping edge in the tube.  This he rent open and
instantly saw a light behind; it was at least certain that he had
struck some other cell.

It is a characteristic of all things now called "efficient",
which means mechanical and calculated, that if they go wrong at
all they go entirely wrong.  There is no power of retrieving a
defeat, as in simpler and more living organisms.  A strong gun can
conquer a strong elephant, but a wounded elephant can easily
conquer a broken gun.  Thus the Prussian monarchy in the
eighteenth century, or now, can make a strong army merely by
making the men afraid.  But it does it with the permanent
possibility that the men may some day be more afraid of their
enemies than of their officers.  Thus the drainage in our cities
so long as it is quite solid means a general safety, but if there
is one leak it means concentrated poison--an explosion of deathly
germs like dynamite, a spirit of stink.  Thus, indeed, all that
excellent machinery which is the swiftest thing on earth in
saving human labour is also the slowest thing on earth in
resisting human interference.  It may be easier to get chocolate
for nothing out of a shopkeeper than out of an automatic machine.
But if you did manage to steal the chocolate, the automatic
machine would be much less likely to run after you.

Turnbull was not long in discovering this truth in connexion with
the cold and colossal machinery of this great asylum.  He had been
shaken by many spiritual states since the instant when he was
pitched head foremost into that private cell which was to be his
private room till death.  He had felt a high fit of pride and
poetry, which had ebbed away and left him deadly cold.  He had
known a period of mere scientific curiosity, in the course of
which he examined all the tiles of his cell, with the gratifying
conclusion that they were all the same shape and size; but was
greatly puzzled about the angle in the wall at the end, and also
about an iron peg or spike that stood out from the wall, the
object of which he does not know to this day.  Then he had a
period of mere madness not to be written of by decent men, but
only by those few dirty novelists hallooed on by the infernal
huntsman to hunt down and humiliate human nature.  This also
passed, but left behind it a feverish distaste for many of the
mere objects around him.  Long after he had returned to sanity and
such hopeless cheerfulness as a man might have on a desert
island, he disliked the regular squares of the pattern of wall
and floor and the triangle that terminated his corridor.  Above
all, he had a hatred, deep as the hell he did not believe in, for
the objectless iron peg in the wall.

But in all his moods, sane or insane, intolerant or stoical, he
never really doubted this: that the machine held him as light and
as hopelessly as he had from his birth been held by the hopeless
cosmos of his own creed.  He knew well the ruthless and
inexhaustible resources of our scientific civilization.  He no
more expected rescue from a medical certificate than rescue from
the solar system.  In many of his Robinson Crusoe moods he thought
kindly of MacIan as of some quarrelsome school-fellow who had
long been dead.  He thought of leaving in the cell when he died a
rigid record of his opinions, and when he began to write them
down on scraps of envelope in his pocket, he was startled to
discover how much they had changed.  Then he remembered the
Beauchamp Tower, and tried to write his blazing scepticism on the
wall, and discovered that it was all shiny tiles on which nothing
could be either drawn or carved.  Then for an instant there hung
and broke above him like a high wave the whole horror of
scientific imprisonment, which manages to deny a man not only
liberty, but every accidental comfort of bondage.  In the old
filthy dungeons men could carve their prayers or protests in the
rock.  Here the white and slippery walls escaped even from bearing
witness.  The old prisoners could make a pet of a mouse or a
beetle strayed out of a hole.  Here the unpierceable walls were
washed every morning by an automatic sluice.  There was no natural
corruption and no merciful decay by which a living thing could
enter in.  Then James Turnbull looked up and saw the high
invincible hatefulness of the society in which he lived, and saw
the hatefulness of something else also, which he told himself
again and again was not the cosmos in which he believed.  But all
the time he had never once doubted that the five sides of his
cell were for him the wall of the world henceforward, and it gave
him a shock of surprise even to discover the faint light through
the aperture in the ventilation tube.  But he had forgotten how
close efficiency has to pack everything together and how easily,
therefore, a pipe here or there may leak.

Turnbull thrust his first finger down the aperture, and at last
managed to make a slight further fissure in the piping.  The light
that came up from beyond was very faint, and apparently indirect;
it seemed to fall from some hole or window higher up.  As he was
screwing his eye to peer at this grey and greasy twilight he was
astonished to see another human finger very long and lean come
down from above towards the broken pipe and hook it up to
something higher.  The lighted aperture was abruptly blackened and
blocked, presumably by a face and mouth, for something human
spoke down the tube, though the words were not clear.

"Who is that?" asked Turnbull, trembling with excitement, yet
wary and quite resolved not to spoil any chance.

After a few indistinct sounds the voice came down with a strong
Argyllshire accent:

"I say, Turnbull, we couldn't fight through this tube, could we?"

Sentiments beyond speech surged up in Turnbull and silenced him
for a space just long enough to be painful.  Then he said with his
old gaiety: "I vote we talk a little first; I don't want to
murder the first man I have met for ten million years."

"I know what you mean," answered the other.  "It has been awful.
For a mortal month I have been alone with God."

Turnbull started, and it was on the tip of his tongue to answer:
"Alone with God!  Then you do not know what loneliness is."

But he answered, after all, in his old defiant style: "Alone with
God, were you?  And I suppose you found his Majesty's society
rather monotonous?"

"Oh, no," said MacIan, and his voice shuddered; "it was a great
deal too exciting."

After a very long silence the voice of MacIan said: "What do you
really hate most in your place?"

"You'd think I was really mad if I told you," answered Turnbull,
bitterly.

"Then I expect it's the same as mine," said the other voice.

"I am sure it's not the same as anybody's," said Turnbull, "for
it has no rhyme or reason.  Perhaps my brain really has gone, but
I detest that iron spike in the left wall more than the damned
desolation or the damned cocoa.  Have you got one in your cell?"

"Not now," replied MacIan with serenity.  "I've pulled it out."

His fellow-prisoner could only repeat the words.

"I pulled it out the other day when I was off my head," continued
the tranquil Highland voice.  "It looked so unnecessary."

"You must be ghastly strong," said Turnbull.

"One is, when one is mad," was the careless reply, "and it had
worn a little loose in the socket.  Even now I've got it out I
can't discover what it was for.  But I've found out something a
long sight funnier."

"What do you mean?" asked Turnbull.

"I have found out where A is," said the other.

Three weeks afterwards MacIan had managed to open up
communications which made his meaning plain.  By that time the two
captives had fully discovered and demonstrated that weakness in
the very nature of modern machinery to which we have already
referred.  The very fact that they were isolated from all
companions meant that they were free from all spies, and as there
were no gaolers to be bribed, so there were none to be baffled.
Machinery brought them their cocoa and cleaned their cells; that
machinery was as helpless as it was pitiless.  A little patient
violence, conducted day after day amid constant mutual
suggestion, opened an irregular hole in the wall, large enough to
let in a small man, in the exact place where there had been
before the tiny ventilation holes.  Turnbull tumbled somehow into
MacIan's apartment, and his first glance found out that the iron
spike was indeed plucked from its socket, and left, moreover,
another ragged hole into some hollow place behind.  But for this
MacIan's cell was the duplicate of Turnbull's--a long oblong
ending in a wedge and lined with cold and lustrous tiles.  The
small hole from which the peg had been displaced was in that
short oblique wall at the end nearest to Turnbull's.  That
individual looked at it with a puzzled face.

"What is in there?" he asked.

MacIan answered briefly: "Another cell."

"But where can the door of it be?" said his companion, even more
puzzled; "the doors of our cells are at the other end."

"It has no door," said Evan.

In the pause of perplexity that followed, an eerie and sinister
feeling crept over Turnbull's stubborn soul in spite of himself.
The notion of the doorless room chilled him with that sense of
half-witted curiosity which one has when something horrible is
half understood.

"James Turnbull," said MacIan, in a low and shaken voice, "these
people hate us more than Nero hated Christians, and fear us more
than any man feared Nero.  They have filled England with frenzy
and galloping in order to capture us and wipe us out--in order to
kill us.  And they have killed us, for you and I have only made a
hole in our coffins.  But though this hatred that they felt for us
is bigger than they felt for Bonaparte, and more plain and
practical than they would feel for Jack the Ripper, yet it is not
we whom the people of this place hate most."

A cold and quivering impatience continued to crawl up Turnbull's
spine; he had never felt so near to superstition and
supernaturalism, and it was not a pretty sort of superstition
either.

"There is another man more fearful and hateful," went on MacIan,
in his low monotone voice, "and they have buried him even deeper.
God knows how they did it, for he was let in by neither door nor
window, nor lowered through any opening above.  I expect these
iron handles that we both hate have been part of some damned
machinery for walling him up.  He is there.  I have looked through
the hole at him; but I cannot stand looking at him long, because
his face is turned away from me and he does not move."

Al Turnbull's unnatural and uncompleted feelings found their
outlet in rushing to the aperture and looking into the unknown
room.

It was a third oblong cell exactly like the other two except that
it was doorless, and except that on one of the walls was painted
a large black A like the B and C outside their own doors.  The
letter in this case was not painted outside, because this prison
had no outside.

On the same kind of tiled floor, of which the monotonous squares
had maddened Turnbull's eye and brain, was sitting a figure which
was startlingly short even for a child, only that the enormous
head was ringed with hair of a frosty grey.  The figure was
draped, both insecurely and insufficiently, in what looked like
the remains of a brown flannel dressing-gown; an emptied cup of
cocoa stood on the floor beside it, and the creature had his big
grey head cocked at a particular angle of inquiry or attention
which amid all that gathering gloom and mystery struck one as
comic if not cocksure.

After six still seconds Turnbull could stand it no longer, but
called out to the dwarfish thing--in what words heaven knows.  The
thing got up with the promptitude of an animal, and turning round
offered the spectacle of two owlish eyes and a huge
grey-and-white beard not unlike the plumage of an owl.  This
extraordinary beard covered him literally to his feet (not that
that was very far), and perhaps it was as well that it did, for
portions of his remaining clothing seemed to fall off whenever he
moved.  One talks trivially of a face like parchment, but this old
man's face was so wrinkled that it was like a parchment loaded
with hieroglyphics.  The lines of his face were so deep and
complex that one could see five or ten different faces besides
the real one, as one can see them in an elaborate wall-paper.  And
yet while his face seemed like a scripture older than the gods,
his eyes were quite bright, blue, and startled like those of a
baby.  They looked as if they had only an instant before been
fitted into his head.

Everything depended so obviously upon whether this buried monster
spoke that Turnbull did not know or care whether he himself had
spoken.  He said something or nothing.  And then he waited for this
dwarfish voice that had been hidden under the mountains of the
world.  At last it did speak, and spoke in English, with a foreign
accent that was neither Latin nor Teutonic.  He suddenly stretched
out a long and very dirty forefinger, and cried in a voice of
clear recognition, like a child's: "That's a hole."

He digested the discovery for some seconds, sucking his finger,
and then he cried, with a crow of laughter: "And that's a head
come through it."

The hilarious energy in this idiot attitude gave Turnbull another
sick turn.  He had grown to tolerate those dreary and mumbling
madmen who trailed themselves about the beautiful asylum gardens.
But there was something new and subversive of the universe in the
combination of so much cheerful decision with a body without a
brain.

"Why did they put you in such a place?" he asked at last with
embarrassment.

"Good place.  Yes," said the old man, nodding a great many times
and beaming like a flattered landlord.  "Good shape.  Long and
narrow, with a point.  Like this," and he made lovingly with his
hands a map of the room in the air.

"But that's not the best," he added, confidentially.  "Squares
very good; I have a nice long holiday, and can count them.  But
that's not the best."

"What is the best?" asked Turnbull in great distress.

"Spike is the best," said the old man, opening his blue eyes
blazing; "it sticks out."

The words Turnbull spoke broke out of him in pure pity.  "Can't we
do anything for you?" he said.

"I am very happy," said the other, alphabetically.  "You are a
good man.  Can I help you?"

"No, I don't think you can, sir," said Turnbull with rough
pathos; "I am glad you are contented at least."

The weird old person opened his broad blue eyes and fixed
Turnbull with a stare extraordinarily severe.  "You are quite
sure," he said, "I cannot help you?"

"Quite sure, thank you," said Turnbull with broken brevity.  "Good
day."

Then he turned to MacIan who was standing close behind him, and
whose face, now familiar in all its moods, told him easily that
Evan had heard the whole of the strange dialogue.

"Curse those cruel beasts!" cried Turnbull.  "They've turned him
to an imbecile just by burying him alive.  His brain's like a
pin-point now."

"You are sure he is a lunatic?" said Evan, slowly.

"Not a lunatic," said Turnbull, "an idiot.  He just points to
things and says that they stick out."

"He had a notion that he could help us," said MacIan moodily, and
began to pace towards the other end of his cell.

"Yes, it was a bit pathetic," assented Turnbull; "such a Thing
offering help, and besides---- Hallo!  Hallo!  What's the matter?"

"God Almighty guide us all!" said MacIan.

He was standing heavy and still at the other end of the room and
staring quietly at the door which for thirty days had sealed them
up from the sun.  Turnbull, following the other's eye, stared at
the door likewise, and then he also uttered an exclamation.  The
iron door was standing about an inch and a half open.

"He said----" began Evan, in a trembling voice--"he offered----"

"Come along, you fool!" shouted Turnbull with a sudden and
furious energy.  "I see it all now, and it's the best stroke of
luck in the world.  You pulled out that iron handle that had
screwed up his cell, and it somehow altered the machinery and
opened all the doors."

Seizing MacIan by the elbow he bundled him bodily out into the
open corridor and ran him on till they saw daylight through a
half-darkened window.

"All the same," said Evan, like one answering in an ordinary
conversation, "he did ask you whether he could help you."

All this wilderness of windowless passages was so built into the
heart of that fortress of fear that it seemed more than an hour
before the fugitives had any good glimpse of the outer world.
They did not even know what hour of the day it was; and when,
turning a corner, they saw the bare tunnel of the corridor end
abruptly in a shining square of garden, the grass burning in that
strong evening sunshine which makes it burnished gold rather than
green, the abrupt opening on to the earth seemed like a hole
knocked in the wall of heaven.  Only once or twice in life is it
permitted to a man thus to see the very universe from outside,
and feel existence itself as an adorable adventure not yet begun.
As they found this shining escape out of that hellish labyrinth
they both had simultaneously the sensation of being babes unborn,
of being asked by God if they would like to live upon the earth.
They were looking in at one of the seven gates of Eden.

Turnbull was the first to leap into the garden, with an
earth-spurning leap like that of one who could really spread his
wings and fly.  MacIan, who came an instant after, was less full
of mere animal gusto and fuller of a more fearful and quivering
pleasure in the clear and innocent flower colours and the high
and holy trees.  With one bound they were in that cool and cleared
landscape, and they found just outside the door the black-clad
gentleman with the cloven chin smilingly regarding them; and his
chin seemed to grow longer and longer as he smiled.



XVIII. A RIDDLE OF FACES

Just behind him stood two other doctors: one, the familiar Dr.
Quayle, of the blinking eyes and bleating voice; the other, a
more commonplace but much more forcible figure, a stout young
doctor with short, well-brushed hair and a round but resolute
face.  At the sight of the escape these two subordinates uttered a
cry and sprang forward, but their superior remained motionless
and smiling, and somehow the lack of his support seemed to arrest
and freeze them in the very gesture of pursuit.

"Let them be," he cried in a voice that cut like a blade of ice;
and not only of ice, but of some awful primordial ice that had
never been water.

"I want no devoted champions," said the cutting voice; "even the
folly of one's friends bores one at last.  You don't suppose I
should have let these lunatics out of their cells without good
reason.  I have the best and fullest reason.  They can be let out
of their cell today, because today the whole world has become
their cell.  I will have no more medieval mummery of chains and
doors.  Let them wander about the earth as they wandered about
this garden, and I shall still be their easy master.  Let them
take the wings of the morning and abide in the uttermost parts of
the sea--I am there.  Whither shall they go from my presence and
whither shall they flee from my spirit?  Courage, Dr. Quayle, and
do not be downhearted; the real days of tyranny are only
beginning on this earth."

And with that the Master laughed and swung away from them, almost
as if his laugh was a bad thing for people to see.

"Might I speak to you a moment?" said Turnbull, stepping forward
with a respectful resolution.  But the shoulders of the Master
only seemed to take on a new and unexpected angle of mockery as
he strode away.

Turnbull swung round with great abruptness to the other two
doctors, and said, harshly: "What in snakes does he mean--and who
are you?"

"My name is Hutton," said the short, stout man, "and I am--well,
one of those whose business it is to uphold this establishment."

"My name is Turnbull," said the other; "I am one of those whose
business it is to tear it to the ground."

The small doctor smiled, and Turnbull's anger seemed suddenly to
steady him.

"But I don't want to talk about that," he said, calmly; "I only
want to know what the Master of this asylum really means."

Dr. Hutton's smile broke into a laugh which, short as it was, had
the suspicion of a shake in it.  "I suppose you think that quite a
simple question," he said.

"I think it a plain question," said Turnbull, "and one that
deserves a plain answer.  Why did the Master lock us up in a
couple of cupboards like jars of pickles for a mortal month, and
why does he now let us walk free in the garden again?"

"I understand," said Hutton, with arched eyebrows, "that your
complaint is that you are now free to walk in the garden."

"My complaint is," said Turnbull, stubbornly, "that if I am fit
to walk freely now, I have been as fit for the last month.  No one
has examined me, no one has come near me.  Your chief says that I
am only free because he has made other arrangements.  What are
those arrangements?"

The young man with the round face looked down for a little while
and smoked reflectively.  The other and elder doctor had gone
pacing nervously by himself upon the lawn.  At length the round
face was lifted again, and showed two round blue eyes with a
certain frankness in them.

"Well, I don't see that it can do any harm to tell you know," he
said.  "You were shut up just then because it was just during that
month that the Master was bringing off his big scheme.  He was
getting his bill through Parliament, and organizing the new
medical police.  But of course you haven't heard of all that; in
fact, you weren't meant to."

"Heard of all what?" asked the impatient inquirer.

"There's a new law now, and the asylum powers are greatly
extended.  Even if you did escape now, any policeman would take
you up in the next town if you couldn't show a certificate of
sanity from us."

"Well," continued Dr. Hutton, "the Master described before both
Houses of Parliament the real scientific objection to all
existing legislation about lunacy.  As he very truly said, the
mistake was in supposing insanity to be merely an exception or an
extreme.  Insanity, like forgetfulness, is simply a quality which
enters more or less into all human beings; and for practical
purposes it is more necessary to know whose mind is really
trustworthy than whose has some accidental taint.  We have
therefore reversed the existing method, and people now have to
prove that they are sane.  In the first village you entered, the
village constable would notice that you were not wearing on the
left lapel of your coat the small pewter S which is now necessary
to any one who walks about beyond asylum bounds or outside asylum
hours."

"You mean to say," said Turnbull, "that this was what the Master
of the asylum urged before the House of Commons?"

Dr. Hutton nodded with gravity.

"And you mean to say," cried Turnbull, with a vibrant snort,
"that that proposal was passed in an assembly that calls itself
democratic?"

The doctor showed his whole row of teeth in a smile.  "Oh, the
assembly calls itself Socialist now," he said, "But we explained
to them that this was a question for men of science."

Turnbull gave one stamp upon the gravel, then pulled himself
together, and resumed: "But why should your infernal head
medicine-man lock us up in separate cells while he was turning
England into a madhouse?  I'm not the Prime Minister; we're not
the House of Lords."

"He wasn't afraid of the Prime Minister," replied Dr. Hutton; "he
isn't afraid of the House of Lords.  But----"

"Well?" inquired Turnbull, stamping again.

"He is afraid of you," said Hutton, simply.  "Why, didn't you
know?"

MacIan, who had not spoken yet, made one stride forward and stood
with shaking limbs and shining eyes.

"He was afraid!" began Evan, thickly.  "You mean to say that
we----"

"I mean to say the plain truth now that the danger is over," said
Hutton, calmly; "most certainly you two were the only people he
ever was afraid of."  Then he added in a low but not inaudible
voice: "Except one--whom he feared worse, and has buried deeper."

"Come away," cried MacIan, "this has to be thought about."

Turnbull followed him in silence as he strode away, but just
before he vanished, turned and spoke again to the doctors.

"But what has got hold of people?" he asked, abruptly.  "Why
should all England have gone dotty on the mere subject of
dottiness?"

Dr. Hutton smiled his open smile once more and bowed slightly.
"As to that also," he replied, "I don't want to make you vain."

Turnbull swung round without a word, and he and his companion
were lost in the lustrous leafage of the garden.  They noticed
nothing special about the scene, except that the garden seemed
more exquisite than ever in the deepening sunset, and that there
seemed to be many more people, whether patients or attendants,
walking about in it.

From behind the two black-coated doctors as they stood on the
lawn another figure somewhat similarly dressed strode hurriedly
past them, having also grizzled hair and an open flapping
frock-coat.  Both his decisive step and dapper black array marked
him out as another medical man, or at least a man in authority,
and as he passed Turnbull the latter was aroused by a strong
impression of having seen the man somewhere before.  It was no one
that he knew well, yet he was certain that it was someone at
whom he had at sometime or other looked steadily.  It was neither
the face of a friend nor of an enemy; it aroused neither
irritation nor tenderness, yet it was a face which had for some
reason been of great importance in his life.  Turning and
returning, and making detours about the garden, he managed to
study the man's face again and again--a moustached, somewhat
military face with a monocle, the sort of face that is
aristocratic without being distinguished.  Turnbull could not
remember any particular doctors in his decidedly healthy
existence.  Was the man a long-lost uncle, or was he only somebody
who had sat opposite him regularly in a railway train?  At that
moment the man knocked down his own eye-glass with a gesture of
annoyance; Turnbull remembered the gesture, and the truth sprang
up solid in front of him.  The man with the moustaches was
Cumberland Vane, the London police magistrate before whom he and
MacIan had once stood on their trial.  The magistrate must have
been transferred to some other official duties--to something
connected with the inspection of asylums.

Turnbull's heart gave a leap of excitement which was half hope.
As a magistrate Mr. Cumberland Vane had been somewhat careless
and shallow, but certainly kindly, and not inaccessible to common
sense so long as it was put to him in strictly conventional
language.  He was at least an authority of a more human and
refreshing sort than the crank with the wagging beard or the
fiend with the forked chin.

He went straight up to the magistrate, and said: "Good evening,
Mr. Vane; I doubt if you remember me."

Cumberland Vane screwed the eye-glass into his scowling face for
an instant, and then said curtly but not uncivilly: "Yes, I
remember you, sir; assault or battery, wasn't it?--a fellow broke
your window.  A tall fellow--McSomething--case made rather a noise
afterwards."

"MacIan is the name, sir," said Turnbull, respectfully; "I have
him here with me."

"Eh!" said Vane very sharply.  "Confound him!  Has he got anything
to do with this game?"

"Mr. Vane," said Turnbull, pacifically, "I will not pretend that
either he or I acted quite decorously on that occasion.  You were
very lenient with us, and did not treat us as criminals when you
very well might.  So I am sure you will give us your testimony
that, even if we were criminals, we are not lunatics in any legal
or medical sense whatever.  I am sure you will use your influence
for us."

"My influence!" repeated the magistrate, with a slight start.  "I
don't quite understand you."

"I don't know in what capacity you are here," continued Turnbull,
gravely, "but a legal authority of your distinction must
certainly be here in an important one.  Whether you are visiting
and inspecting the place, or attached to it as some kind of
permanent legal adviser, your opinion must still----"

Cumberland Vane exploded with a detonation of oaths; his face was
transfigured with fury and contempt, and yet in some odd way he
did not seem specially angry with Turnbull.

"But Lord bless us and save us!" he gasped, at length; "I'm not
here as an official at all.  I'm here as a patient.  The cursed
pack of rat-catching chemists all say that I've lost my wits."

"You!" cried Turnbull with terrible emphasis.  "You!  Lost your
wits!"

In the rush of his real astonishment at this towering unreality
Turnbull almost added: "Why, you haven't got any to lose."  But he
fortunately remembered the remains of his desperate diplomacy.

"This can't go on," he said, positively.  "Men like MacIan and I
may suffer unjustly all our lives, but a man like you must have
influence."

"There is only one man who has any influence in England now,"
said Vane, and his high voice fell to a sudden and convincing
quietude.

"Whom do you mean?" asked Turnbull.

"I mean that cursed fellow with the long split chin," said the
other.

"Is it really true," asked Turnbull, "that he has been allowed to
buy up and control such a lot?  What put the country into such a
state?"

Mr. Cumberland Vane laughed outright.  "What put the country into
such a state?" he asked.  "Why, you did.  When you were fool enough
to agree to fight MacIan, after all, everybody was ready to
believe that the Bank of England might paint itself pink with
white spots."

"I don't understand," answered Turnbull.  "Why should you be
surprised at my fighting?  I hope I have always fought."

"Well," said Cumberland Vane, airily, "you didn't believe in
religion, you see--so we thought you were safe at any rate.  You
went further in your language than most of us wanted to go; no
good in just hurting one's mother's feelings, I think.  But of
course we all knew you were right, and, really, we relied on
you."

"Did you?" said the editor of _The Atheist_ with a bursting
heart.  "I am sorry you did not tell me so at the time."

He walked away very rapidly and flung himself on a garden seat,
and for some six minutes his own wrongs hid from him the huge and
hilarious fact that Cumberland Vane had been locked up as a
lunatic.

The garden of the madhouse was so perfectly planned, and answered
so exquisitely to every hour of daylight, that one could almost
fancy that the sunlight was caught there tangled in its tinted
trees, as the wise men of Gotham tried to chain the spring to a
bush.  Or it seemed as if this ironic paradise still kept its
unique dawn or its special sunset while the rest of the earthly
globe rolled through its ordinary hours.  There was one evening,
or late afternoon, in particular, which Evan MacIan will remember
in the last moments of death.  It was what artists call a daffodil
sky, but it is coarsened even by reference to a daffodil.  It was
of that innocent lonely yellow which has never heard of orange,
though it might turn quite unconsciously into green.  Against it
the tops, one might say the turrets, of the clipt and ordered
trees were outlined in that shade of veiled violet which tints
the tops of lavender.  A white early moon was hardly traceable
upon that delicate yellow.  MacIan, I say, will remember this
tender and transparent evening, partly because of its virgin gold
and silver, and partly because he passed beneath it through the
most horrible instant of his life.

Turnbull was sitting on his seat on the lawn, and the golden
evening impressed even his positive nature, as indeed it might
have impressed the oxen in a field.  He was shocked out of his
idle mood of awe by seeing MacIan break from behind the bushes
and run across the lawn with an action he had never seen in the
man before, with all his experience of the eccentric humours of
this Celt.  MacIan fell on the bench, shaking it so that it
rattled, and gripped it with his knees like one in dreadful pain
of body.  That particular run and tumble is typical only of a man
who has been hit by some sudden and incurable evil, who is bitten
by a viper or condemned to be hanged.  Turnbull looked up in the
white face of his friend and enemy, and almost turned cold at
what he saw there.  He had seen the blue but gloomy eyes of the
western Highlander troubled by as many tempests as his own west
Highland seas, but there had always been a fixed star of faith
behind the storms.  Now the star had gone out, and there was only
misery.

Yet MacIan had the strength to answer the question where
Turnbull, taken by surprise, had not the strength to ask it.

"They are right, they are right!" he cried.  "O my God! they are
right, Turnbull.  I ought to be here!"

He went on with shapeless fluency as if he no longer had the
heart to choose or check his speech.  "I suppose I ought to have
guessed long ago--all my big dreams and schemes--and everyone
being against us--but I was stuck up, you know."

"Do tell me about it, really," cried the atheist, and, faced with
the furnace of the other's pain, he did not notice that he spoke
with the affection of a father.

"I am mad, Turnbull," said Evan, with a dead clearness of speech,
and leant back against the garden seat.

"Nonsense," said the other, clutching at the obvious cue of
benevolent brutality, "this is one of your silly moods."

MacIan shook his head.  "I know enough about myself," he said, "to
allow for any mood, though it opened heaven or hell.  But to see
things--to see them walking solid in the sun--things that can't
be there--real mystics never do that, Turnbull."

"What things?" asked the other, incredulously.

MacIan lowered his voice.  "I saw _her_," he said, "three minutes
ago--walking here in this hell yard."

Between trying to look scornful and really looking startled,
Turnbull's face was confused enough to emit no speech, and Evan
went on in monotonous sincerity:

"I saw her walk behind those blessed trees against that holy sky
of gold as plain as I can see her whenever I shut my eyes.  I did
shut them, and opened them again, and she was still there--that
is, of course, she wasn't---- She still had a little fur round
her neck, but her dress was a shade brighter than when I really
saw her."

"My dear fellow," cried Turnbull, rallying a hearty laugh, "the
fancies have really got hold of you.  You mistook some other poor
girl here for her."

"Mistook some other----" said MacIan, and words failed him
altogether.

They sat for some moments in the mellow silence of the evening
garden, a silence that was stifling for the sceptic, but utterly
empty and final for the man of faith.  At last he broke out again
with the words: "Well, anyhow, if I'm mad, I'm glad I'm mad on
that."

Turnbull murmured some clumsy deprecation, and sat stolidly
smoking to collect his thoughts; the next instant he had all his
nerves engaged in the mere effort to sit still.

Across the clear space of cold silver and a pale lemon sky which
was left by the gap in the ilex-trees there passed a slim, dark
figure, a profile and the poise of a dark head like a bird's,
which really pinned him to his seat with the point of
coincidence.  With an effort he got to his feet, and said with a
voice of affected insouciance: "By George!  MacIan, she is
uncommonly like----"

"What!" cried MacIan, with a leap of eagerness that was
heart-breaking, "do you see her, too?"  And the blaze came back
into the centre of his eyes.

Turnbull's tawny eyebrows were pulled together with a peculiar
frown of curiosity, and all at once he walked quickly across the
lawn.  MacIan sat rigid, but peered after him with open and
parched lips.  He saw the sight which either proved him sane or
proved the whole universe half-witted; he saw the man of flesh
approach that beautiful phantom, saw their gestures of
recognition, and saw them against the sunset joining hands.

He could stand it no longer, but ran across to the path, turned
the corner and saw standing quite palpable in the evening
sunlight, talking with a casual grace to Turnbull, the face and
figure which had filled his midnights with frightfully vivid or
desperately half-forgotten features.  She advanced quite
pleasantly and coolly, and put out her hand.  The moment that he
touched it he knew that he was sane even if the solar system was
crazy.

She was entirely elegant and unembarrassed.  That is the awful
thing about women--they refuse to be emotional at emotional
moments, upon some such ludicrous pretext as there being someone
else there.  But MacIan was in a condition of criticism much less
than the average masculine one, being in fact merely overturned
by the rushing riddle of the events.

Evan does not know to this day what particular question he asked,
but he vividly remembers that she answered, and every line or
fluctuation of her face as she said it.

"Oh, don't you know?" she said, smiling, and suddenly lifting her
level brown eyebrows.  "Haven't you heard the news?  I'm a
lunatic."

Then she added after a short pause, and with a sort of pride:
"I've got a certificate."

Her manner, by the matchless social stoicism of her sex, was
entirely suited to a drawing-room, but Evan's reply fell somewhat
far short of such a standard, as he only said: "What the devil in
hell does all this nonsense mean?"

"Really," said the young lady, and laughed.

"I beg your pardon," said the unhappy young man, rather wildly,
"but what I mean is, why are you here in an asylum?"

The young woman broke again into one of the maddening and
mysterious laughs of femininity.  Then she composed her features,
and replied with equal dignity: "Well, if it comes to that, why
are you?"

The fact that Turnbull had strolled away and was investigating
rhododendrons may have been due to Evan's successful prayers to
the other world, or possibly to his own pretty successful
experience of this one.  But though they two were as isolated as a
new Adam and Eve in a pretty ornamental Eden, the lady did not
relax by an inch the rigour of her badinage.

"I am locked up in the madhouse," said Evan, with a sort of stiff
pride, "because I tried to keep my promise to you."

"Quite so," answered the inexplicable lady, nodding with a
perfectly blazing smile, "and I am locked up because it was to me
you promised."

"It is outrageous!" cried Evan; "it is impossible!"

"Oh, you can see my certificate if you like," she replied with
some hauteur.

MacIan stared at her and then at his boots, and then at the sky
and then at her again.  He was quite sure now that he himself was
not mad, and the fact rather added to his perplexity.

Then he drew nearer to her, and said in a dry and dreadful voice:
"Oh, don't condescend to play the fool with such a fool as me.
Are you really locked up here as a patient--because you helped us
to escape?"

"Yes," she said, still smiling, but her steady voice had a shake
in it.

Evan flung his big elbow across his forehead and burst into
tears.

The pure lemon of the sky faded into purer white as the great
sunset silently collapsed.  The birds settled back into the trees;
the moon began to glow with its own light.  Mr. James Turnbull
continued his botanical researches into the structure of the
rhododendron.  But the lady did not move an inch until Evan had
flung up his face again; and when he did he saw by the last gleam
of sunlight that it was not only his face that was wet.

Mr. James Turnbull had all his life professed a profound interest
in physical science, and the phenomena of a good garden were
really a pleasure to him; but after three-quarters of an hour or
so even the apostle of science began to find rhododendrus a bore,
and was somewhat relieved when an unexpected development of
events obliged him to transfer his researches to the equally
interesting subject of hollyhocks, which grew some fifty feet
farther along the path.  The ostensible cause of his removal was
the unexpected reappearance of his two other acquaintances
walking and talking laboriously along the way, with the black
head bent close to the brown one.  Even hollyhocks detained
Turnbull but a short time.  Having rapidly absorbed all the
important principles affecting the growth of those vegetables, he
jumped over a flower-bed and walked back into the building.  The
other two came up along the slow course of the path talking and
talking.  No one but God knows what they said (for they certainly
have forgotten), and if I remembered it I would not repeat it.
When they parted at the head of the walk she put out her hand
again in the same well-bred way, although it trembled; he seemed
to restrain a gesture as he let it fall.

"If it is really always to be like this," he said, thickly, "it
would not matter if we were here for ever."

"You tried to kill yourself four times for me," she said,
unsteadily, "and I have been chained up as a madwoman for you.
I really think that after that----"

"Yes, I know," said Evan in a low voice, looking down.  "After
that we belong to each other.  We are sort of sold to each
other--until the stars fall."  Then he looked up suddenly, and
said: "By the way, what is your name?"

"My name is Beatrice Drake," she replied with complete gravity.
"You can see it on my certificate of lunacy."



XIX. THE LAST PARLEY

Turnbull walked away, wildly trying to explain to himself the
presence of two personal acquaintances so different as Vane and
the girl.  As he skirted a low hedge of laurel, an enormously tall
young man leapt over it, stood in front of him, and almost fell
on his neck as if seeking to embrace him.

"Don't you know me?" almost sobbed the young man, who was in the
highest spirits.  "Ain't I written on your heart, old boy?  I say,
what did you do with my yacht?"

"Take your arms off my neck," said Turnbull, irritably.  "Are you
mad?"

The young man sat down on the gravel path and went into ecstasies
of laughter.  "No, that's just the fun of it--I'm not mad," he
replied.  "They've shut me up in this place, and I'm not mad."  And
he went off again into mirth as innocent as wedding-bells.

Turnbull, whose powers of surprise were exhausted, rolled his
round grey eyes and said, "Mr. Wilkinson, I think," because he
could not think of anything else to say.

The tall man sitting on the gravel bowed with urbanity, and said:
"Quite at your service.  Not to be confused with the Wilkinsons of
Cumberland; and as I say, old boy, what have you done with my
yacht?  You see, they've locked me up here--in this garden--and a
yacht would be a sort of occupation for an unmarried man."

"I am really horribly sorry," began Turnbull, in the last stage
of bated bewilderment and exasperation, "but really----"

"Oh, I can see you can't have it on you at the moment," said Mr.
Wilkinson with much intellectual magnanimity.

"Well, the fact is----" began Turnbull again, and then the phrase
was frozen on his mouth, for round the corner came the goatlike
face and gleaming eye-glasses of Dr. Quayle.

"Ah, my dear Mr. Wilkinson," said the doctor, as if delighted at
a coincidence; "and Mr. Turnbull, too.  Why, I want to speak to
Mr. Turnbull."

Mr. Turnbull made some movement rather of surrender than assent,
and the doctor caught it up exquisitely, showing even more of his
two front teeth.  "I am sure Mr. Wilkinson will excuse us a
moment."  And with flying frock-coat he led Turnbull rapidly round
the corner of a path.

"My dear sir," he said, in a quite affectionate manner, "I do not
mind telling you--you are such a very hopeful case--you
understand so well the scientific point of view; and I don't like
to see you bothered by the really hopeless cases.  They are
monotonous and maddening.  The man you have just been talking to,
poor fellow, is one of the strongest cases of pure _idee fixe_
that we have.  It's very sad, and I'm afraid utterly incurable.  He
keeps on telling everybody"--and the doctor lowered his voice
confidentially--"he tells everybody that two people have taken is
yacht.  His account of how he lost it is quite incoherent."

Turnbull stamped his foot on the gravel path, and called out:
"Oh, I can't stand this.  Really----"

"I know, I know," said the psychologist, mournfully; "it is a
most melancholy case, and also fortunately a very rare one.  It is
so rare, in fact, that in one classification of these maladies it
is entered under a heading by itself--Perdinavititis, mental
inflammation creating the impression that one has lost a ship.
Really," he added, with a kind of half-embarrassed guilt, "it's
rather a feather in my cap.  I discovered the only existing case of
perdinavititis."

"But this won't do, doctor," said Turnbull, almost tearing his
hair, "this really won't do.  The man really did lose a ship.
Indeed, not to put too fine a point on it, I took his ship."

Dr. Quayle swung round for an instant so that his silk-lined
overcoat rustled, and stared singularly at Turnbull.  Then he said
with hurried amiability: "Why, of course you did.  Quite so, quite
so," and with courteous gestures went striding up the garden
path.  Under the first laburnum-tree he stopped, however, and
pulling out his pencil and notebook wrote down feverishly:
"Singular development in the Elenthero-maniac, Turnbull.  Sudden
manifestation of Rapinavititis--the delusion that one has stolen
a ship.  First case ever recorded."

Turnbull stood for an instant staggered into stillness.  Then he
ran raging round the garden to find MacIan, just as a husband,
even a bad husband, will run raging to find his wife if he is
full of a furious query.  He found MacIan stalking moodily about
the half-lit garden, after his extraordinary meeting with
Beatrice.  No one who saw his slouching stride and sunken head
could have known that his soul was in the seventh heaven of
ecstasy.  He did not think; he did not even very definitely
desire.  He merely wallowed in memories, chiefly in material
memories; words said with a certain cadence or trivial turns of
the neck or wrist.  Into the middle of his stationary and
senseless enjoyment were thrust abruptly the projecting elbow and
the projecting red beard of Turnbull.  MacIan stepped back a
little, and the soul in his eyes came very slowly to its windows.
When James Turnbull had the glittering sword-point planted upon
his breast he was in far less danger.  For three pulsating seconds
after the interruption MacIan was in a mood to have murdered his
father.

And yet his whole emotional anger fell from him when he saw
Turnbull's face, in which the eyes seemed to be bursting from the
head like bullets.  All the fire and fragrance even of young and
honourable love faded for a moment before that stiff agony of
interrogation.

"Are you hurt, Turnbull?" he asked, anxiously.

"I am dying," answered the other quite calmly.  "I am in the quite
literal sense of the words dying to know something.  I want to
know what all this can possibly mean."

MacIan did not answer, and he continued with asperity: "You are
still thinking about that girl, but I tell you the whole thing is
incredible.  She's not the only person here.  I've met the fellow
Wilkinson, whose yacht we lost.  I've met the very magistrate you
were hauled up to when you broke my window.  What can it
mean--meeting all these old people again?  One never meets such
old friends again except in a dream."

Then after a silence he cried with a rending sincerity: "Are you
really there, Evan?  Have you ever been really there?  Am I simply
dreaming?"

MacIan had been listening with a living silence to every word,
and now his face flamed with one of his rare revelations of life.

"No, you good atheist," he cried; "no, you clean, courteous,
reverent, pious old blasphemer.  No, you are not dreaming--you are
waking up."

"What do you mean?"

"There are two states where one meets so many old friends," said
MacIan; "one is a dream, the other is the end of the world."

"And you say----"

"I say this is not a dream," said Evan in a ringing voice.

"You really mean to suggest----" began Turnbull.

"Be silent! or I shall say it all wrong," said MacIan, breathing
hard.  "It's hard to explain, anyhow.  An apocalypse is the
opposite of a dream.  A dream is falser than the outer life.  But
the end of the world is more actual than the world it ends.  I
don't say this is really the end of the world, but it's something
like that--it's the end of something.  All the people are crowding
into one corner.  Everything is coming to a point."

"What is the point?" asked Turnbull.

"I can't see it," said Evan; "it is too large and plain."

Then after a silence he said: "I can't see it--and yet I will try
to describe it.  Turnbull, three days ago I saw quite suddenly
that our duel was not right after all."

"Three days ago!" repeated Turnbull.  "When and why did this
illumination occur?"

"I knew I was not quite right," answered Evan, "the moment I saw
the round eyes of that old man in the cell."

"Old man in the cell!" repeated his wondering companion.  "Do you
mean the poor old idiot who likes spikes to stick out?"

"Yes," said MacIan, after a slight pause, "I mean the poor old
idiot who likes spikes to stick out.  When I saw his eyes and
heard his old croaking accent, I knew that it would not really
have been right to kill you.  It would have been a venial sin."

"I am much obliged," said Turnbull, gruffly.

"You must give me time," said MacIan, quite patiently, "for I am
trying to tell the whole truth.  I am trying to tell more of it
than I know."

"So you see I confess"--he went on with laborious distinctness--
"I confess that all the people who called our duel mad were right
in a way.  I would confess it to old Cumberland Vane and his
eye-glass.  I would confess it even to that old ass in brown
flannel who talked to us about Love.  Yes, they are right in a
way.  I am a little mad."

He stopped and wiped his brow as if he were literally doing heavy
labour.  Then he went on:

"I am a little mad; but, after all, it is only a little madness.
When hundreds of high-minded men had fought duesl about a jostle
with the elbow or the ace of spades, the whole world need not
have gone wild over my one little wildness.  Plenty of other
people have killed themselves between then and now.  But all
England has gone into captivity in order to take us captive.  All
England has turned into a lunatic asylum in order to prove us
lunatics.  Compared with the general public, I might positively be
called sane."

He stopped again, and went on with the same air of travailing
with the truth:

"When I saw that, I saw everything; I saw the Church and the
world.  The Church in its earthly action has really touched morbid
things--tortures and bleeding visions and blasts of
extermination.  The Church has had her madnesses, and I am one of
them.  I am the massacre of St. Bartholomew.  I am the Inquisition
of Spain.  I do not say that we have never gone mad, but I say
that we are fit to act as keepers to our enemies.  Massacre is
wicked even with a provocation, as in the Bartholomew.  But your
modern Nietzsche will tell you that massacre would be glorious
without a provocation.  Torture should be violently stopped,
though the Church is doing it.  But your modern Tolstoy will tell
you that it ought not to be violently stopped whoever is doing
it.  In the long run, which is most mad--the Church or the world?
Which is madder, the Spanish priest who permitted tyranny, or the
Prussian sophist who admired it?  Which is madder, the Russian
priest who discourages righteous rebellion, or the Russian
novelist who forbids it?  That is the final and blasting test.  The
world left to itself grows wilder than any creed.  A few days ago
you and I were the maddest people in England.  Now, by God!  I
believe we are the sanest.  That is the only real question--
whether the Church is really madder than the world.  Let the
rationalists run their own race, and let us see where _they_ end.
If the world has some healthy balance other than God, let the
world find it.  Does the world find it?  Cut the world loose," he
cried with a savage gesture.  "Does the world stand on its own
end?  Does it stand, or does it stagger?"

Turnbull remained silent, and MacIan said to him, looking once
more at the earth: "It staggers, Turnbull.  It cannot stand by
itself; you know it cannot.  It has been the sorrow of your life.
Turnbull, this garden is not a dream, but an apocalyptic
fulfilment.  This garden is the world gone mad."

Turnbull did not move his head, and he had been listening all the
time; yet, somehow, the other knew that for the first time he was
listening seriously.

"The world has gone mad," said MacIan, "and it has gone mad about
Us.  The world takes the trouble to make a big mistake about every
little mistake made by the Church.  That is why they have turned
ten counties to a madhouse; that is why crowds of kindly people
are poured into this filthy melting-pot.  Now is the judgement of
this world.  The Prince of this World is judged, and he is judged
exactly because he is judging.  There is at last one simple
solution to the quarrel between the ball and the cross----"

Turnbull for the first time started.

"The ball and----" he repeated.

"What is the matter with you?" asked MacIan.

"I had a dream," said Turnbull, thickly and obscurely, "in which
I saw the cross struck crooked and the ball secure----"

"I had a dream," said MacIan, "in which I saw the cross erect and
the ball invisible.  They were both dreams from hell.  There must
be some round earth to plant the cross upon.  But here is the
awful difference--that the round world will not consent even to
continue round.  The astronomers are always telling us that it is
shaped like an orange, or like an egg, or like a German sausage.
They beat the old world about like a bladder and thump it into a
thousand shapeless shapes.  Turnbull, we cannot trust the ball to
be always a ball; we cannot trust reason to be reasonable.  In the
end the great terrestrial globe will go quite lop-sided, and only
the cross will stand upright."

There was a long silence, and then Turnbull said, hesitatingly:
"Has it occurred to you that since--since those two dreams, or
whatever they were----"

"Well?" murmured MacIan.

"Since then," went on Turnbull, in the same low voice, "since
then we have never even looked for our swords."

"You are right," answered Evan almost inaudibly.  "We have found
something which we both hate more than we ever hated each other,
and I think I know its name."

Turnbull seemed to frown and flinch for a moment.  "It does not
much matter what you call it," he said, "so long as you keep out
of its way."

The bushes broke and snapped abruptly behind them, and a very
tall figure towered above Turnbull with an arrogant stoop and a
projecting chin, a chin of which the shape showed queerly even in
its shadow upon the path.

"You see that is not so easy," said MacIan between his teeth.

They looked up into the eyes of the Master, but looked only for a
moment.  The eyes were full of a frozen and icy wrath, a kind of
utterly heartless hatred.  His voice was for the first time devoid
of irony.  There was no more sarcasm in it than there is in an
iron club.

"You will be inside the building in three minutes," he said, with
pulverizing precision, "or you will be fired on by the artillery
at all the windows.  There is too much talking in this garden; we
intend to close it.  You will be accommodated indoors."

"Ah!" said MacIan, with a long and satisfied sigh, "then I was
right."

And he turned his back and walked obediently towards the
building.  Turnbull seemed to canvass for a few minutes the notion
of knocking the Master down, and then fell under the same almost
fairy fatalism as his companion.  In some strange way it did seem
that the more smoothly they yielded, the more swiftly would
events sweep on to some great collision.



XX. DIES IRAE

As they advanced towards the asylum they looked up at its rows on
rows of windows, and understood the Master's material threat.  By
means of that complex but concealed machinery which ran like a
network of nerves over the whole fabric, there had been shot out
under every window-ledge rows and rows of polished-steel
cylinders, the cold miracles of modern gunnery.  They commanded
the whole garden and the whole country-side, and could have blown
to pieces an army corps.

This silent declaration of war had evidently had its complete
effect.  As MacIan and Turnbull walked steadily but slowly towards
the entrance hall of the institution, they could see that most,
or at least many, of the patients had already gathered there as
well as the staff of doctors and the whole regiment of keepers and
assistants.  But when they entered the lamp-lit hall, and the high
iron door was clashed to and locked behind them, yet a new
amazement leapt into their eyes, and the stalwart Turnbull almost
fell.  For he saw a sight which was indeed, as MacIan had
said--either the Day of Judgement or a dream.

Within a few feet of him at one corner of the square of standing
people stood the girl he had known in Jersey, Madeleine Durand.
She looked straight at him with a steady smile which lit up the
scene of darkness and unreason like the light of some honest
fireside.  Her square face and throat were thrown back, as her
habit was, and there was something almost sleepy in the geniality
of her eyes.  He saw her first, and for a few seconds saw her
only; then the outer edge of his eyesight took in all the other
staring faces, and he saw all the faces he had ever seen for
weeks and months past.  There was the Tolstoyan in Jaeger flannel,
with the yellow beard that went backward and the foolish nose and
eyes that went forward, with the curiosity of a crank.  He was
talking eagerly to Mr. Gordon, the corpulent Jew shopkeeper whom
they had once gagged in his own shop.  There was the tipsy old
Hertfordshire rustic; he was talking energetically to himself.
There was not only Mr. Vane the magistrate, but the clerk of Mr.
Vane, the magistrate.  There was not only Miss Drake of the
motor-car, but also Miss Drake's chauffeur.  Nothing wild or
unfamiliar could have produced upon Turnbull such a nightmare
impression as that ring of familiar faces.  Yet he had one
intellectual shock which was greater than all the others.  He
stepped impulsively forward towards Madeleine, and then wavered
with a kind of wild humility.  As he did so he caught sight of
another square face behind Madeleine's, a face with long grey
whiskers and an austere stare.  It was old Durand, the girls'
father; and when Turnbull saw him he saw the last and worst
marvel of that monstrous night.  He remembered Durand; he
remembered his monotonous, everlasting lucidity, his stupefyingly
sensible views of everything, his colossal contentment with
truisms merely because they were true.  "Confound it all!" cried
Turnbull to himself, "if _he_ is in the asylum, there can't be
anyone outside."  He drew nearer to Madeleine, but still
doubtfully and all the more so because she still smiled at him.
MacIan had already gone across to Beatrice with an air of fright.

Then all these bewildered but partly amicable recognitions were
cloven by a cruel voice which always made all human blood turn
bitter.  The Master was standing in the middle of the room
surveying the scene like a great artist looking at a completed
picture.  Handsome as he looked, they had never seen so clearly
what was really hateful in his face; and even then they could
only express it by saying that the arched brows and the long
emphatic chin gave it always a look of being lit from below, like
the face of some infernal actor.

"This is indeed a cosy party," he said, with glittering eyes.

The Master evidently meant to say more, but before he could say
anything M. Durand had stepped right up to him and was speaking.

He was speaking exactly as a French bourgeois speaks to the
manager of a restaurant.  That is, he spoke with rattling and
breathless rapidity, but with no incoherence, and therefore with
no emotion.  It was a steady, monotonous vivacity, which came not
seemingly from passion, but merely from the reason having been
sent off at a gallop.  He was saying something like this:

"You refuse me my half-bottle of Medoc, the drink the most
wholesome and the most customary.  You refuse me the company and
obedience of my daughter, which Nature herself indicates.  You
refuse me the beef and mutton, without pretence that it is a fast
of the Church.  You now forbid me the promenade, a thing necessary
to a person of my age.  It is useless to tell me that you do all
this by law.  Law rests upon the social contract.  If the citizen
finds himself despoiled of such pleasures and powers as he would
have had even in the savage state, the social contract is
annulled."

"It's no good chattering away, Monsieur," said Hutton, for the
Master was silent.  "The place is covered with machine-guns.  We've
got to obey our orders, and so have you."

"The machinery is of the most perfect," assented Durand, somewhat
irrelevantly; "worked by petroleum, I believe.  I only ask you to
admit that if such things fall below the comfort of barbarism,
the social contract is annulled.  It is a pretty little point of
theory."

"Oh!  I dare say," said Hutton.

Durand bowed quite civilly and withdrew.

"A cosy party," resumed the Master, scornfully, "and yet I
believe some of you are in doubt about how we all came together.
I will explain it, ladies and gentlemen; I will explain
everything.  To whom shall I specially address myself?  To Mr.
James Turnbull.  He has a scientific mind."

Turnbull seemed to choke with sudden protest.  The Master seemed
only to cough out of pure politeness and proceeded: "Mr. Turnbull
will agree with me," he said, "when I say that we long felt in
scientific circles that great harm was done by such a legend as
that of the Crucifixion."

Turnbull growled something which was presumably assent.

The Master went on smoothly: "It was in vain for us to urge that
the incident was irrelevant; that there were many such fanatics,
many such executions.  We were forced to take the thing thoroughly
in hand, to investigate it in the spirit of scientific history,
and with the assistance of Mr. Turnbull and others we were happy
in being able to announce that this alleged Crucifixion never
occurred at all."

MacIan lifted his head and looked at the Master steadily, but
Turnbull did not look up.

"This, we found, was the only way with all superstitions,"
continued the speaker; "it was necessary to deny them
historically, and we have done it with great success in the case
of miracles and such things.  Now within our own time there arose
an unfortunate fuss which threatened (as Mr. Turnbull would say)
to galvanize the corpse of Christianity into a fictitious
life--the alleged case of a Highland eccentric who wanted to
fight for the Virgin."

MacIan, quite white, made a step forward, but the speaker did not
alter his easy attitude or his flow of words.  "Again we urged
that this duel was not to be admired, that it was a mere brawl,
but the people were ignorant and romantic.  There were signs of
treating this alleged Highlander and his alleged opponent as
heroes.  We tried all other means of arresting this reactionary
hero worship.  Working men who betted on the duel were imprisoned
for gambling.  Working men who drank the health of a duellist were
imprisoned for drunkenness.  But the popular excitement about the
alleged duel continued, and we had to fall back on our old
historical method.  We investigated, on scientific principles, the
story of MacIan's challenge, and we are happy to be able to
inform you that the whole story of the attempted duel is a fable.
There never was any challenge.  There never was any man named
MacIan.  It is a melodramatic myth, like Calvary."

Not a soul moved save Turnbull, who lifted his head; yet there
was the sense of a silent explosion.

"The whole story of the MacIan challenge," went on the Master,
beaming at them all with a sinister benignity, "has been found to
originate in the obsessions of a few pathological types, who are
now all fortunately in our care.  There is, for instance, a person
here of the name of Gordon, formerly the keeper of a curiosity
shop.  He is a victim of the disease called Vinculomania--the
impression that one has been bound or tied up.  We have also a
case of Fugacity (Mr. Whimpey), who imagines that he was chased
by two men."

The indignant faces of the Jew shopkeeper and the Magdalen Don
started out of the crowd in their indignation, but the speaker
continued:

"One poor woman we have with us," he said, in a compassionate
voice, "believes she was in a motor-car with two such men; this
is the well-known illusion of speed on which I need not dwell.
Another wretched woman has the simple egotistic mania that she
has caused the duel.  Madeleine Durand actually professes to have
been the subject of the fight between MacIan and his enemy, a
fight which, if it occurred at all, certainly began long before.
But it never occurred at all.  We have taken in hand every person
who professed to have seen such a thing, and proved them all to
be unbalanced.  That is why they are here."

The Master looked round the room, just showing his perfect teeth
with the perfection of artistic cruelty, exalted for a moment in
the enormous simplicity of his success, and then walked across
the hall and vanished through an inner door.  His two lieutenants,
Quayle and Hutton, were left standing at the head of the great
army of servants and keepers.

"I hope we shall have no more trouble," said Dr. Quayle
pleasantly enough, and addressing Turnbull, who was leaning
heavily upon the back of a chair.

Still looking down, Turnbull lifted the chair an inch or two from
the ground.  Then he suddenly swung it above his head and sent it
at the inquiring doctor with an awful crash which sent one of its
wooden legs loose along the floor and crammed the doctor gasping
into a corner.  MacIan gave a great shout, snatched up the loose
chair-leg, and, rushing on the other doctor, felled him with a
blow.  Twenty attendants rushed to capture the rebels; MacIan
flung back three of them and Turnbull went over on top of one,
when from behind them all came a shriek as of something quite
fresh and frightful.

Two of the three passages leading out of the hall were choked
with blue smoke.  Another instant and the hall was full of the fog
of it, and red sparks began to swarm like scarlet bees.

"The place is on fire!" cried Quayle with a scream of indecent
terror.  "Oh, who can have done it?  How can it have happened?"

A light had come into Turnbull's eyes.  "How did the French
Revolution happen?" he asked.

"Oh, how should I know!" wailed the other.

"Then I will tell you," said Turnbull; "it happened because some
people fancied that a French grocer was as respectable as he
looked."

Even as he spoke, as if by confirmation, old Mr. Durand
re-entered the smoky room quite placidly, wiping the petroleum
from his hands with a handkerchief.  He had set fire to the
building in accordance with the strict principles of the social
contract.

But MacIan had taken a stride forward and stood there shaken and
terrible.  "Now," he cried, panting, "now is the judgement of the
world.  The doctors will leave this place; the keepers will leave
this place.  They will leave us in charge of the machinery and the
machine-guns at the windows.  But we, the lunatics, will wait to
be burned alive if only we may see them go."

"How do you know we shall go?" asked Hutton, fiercely.

"You believe nothing," said MacIan, simply, "and you are
insupportably afraid of death."

"So this is suicide," sneered the doctor; "a somewhat doubtful
sign of sanity."

"Not at all--this is vengeance," answered Turnbull, quite calmly;
"a thing which is completely healthy."

"You think the doctors will go," said Hutton, savagely.

"The keepers have gone already," said Turnbull.

Even as they spoke the main doors were burst open in mere brutal
panic, and all the officers and subordinates of the asylum rushed
away across the garden pursued by the smoke.  But among the
ticketed maniacs not a man or woman moved.

"We hate dying," said Turnbull, with composure, "but we hate you
even more.  This is a successful revolution."

In the roof above their heads a panel shot back, showing a strip
of star-lit sky and a huge thing made of white metal, with the
shape and fins of a fish, swinging as if at anchor.  At the same
moment a steel ladder slid down from the opening and struck the
floor, and the cleft chin of the mysterious Master was thrust
into the opening.  "Quayle, Hutton," he said, "you will escape
with me."  And they went up the ladder like automata of lead.

Long after they had clambered into the car, the creature with the
cloven face continued to leer down upon the smoke-stung crowd
below.  Then at last he said in a silken voice and with a smile of
final satisfaction:

"By the way, I fear I am very absent minded.  There is one man
specially whom, somehow, I always forget.  I always leave him
lying about.  Once I mislaid him on the Cross of St. Paul's.  So
silly of me; and now I've forgotten him in one of those little
cells where your fire is burning.  Very unfortunate--especially
for him."  And nodding genially, he climbed into his flying ship.

MacIan stood motionless for two minutes, and then rushed down one
of the suffocating corridors till he found the flames.  Turnbull
looked once at Madeleine, and followed.

           *                    *                   *

MacIan, with singed hair, smoking garments, and smarting hands
and face, had already broken far enough through the first
barriers of burning timber to come within cry of the cells he had
once known.  It was impossible, however, to see the spot where the
old man lay dead or alive; not now through darkness, but through
scorching and aching light.  The site of the old half-wit's cell
was now the heart of a standing forest of fire--the flames as
thick and yellow as a cornfield.  Their incessant shrieking and
crackling was like a mob shouting against an orator.  Yet through
all that deafening density MacIan thought he heard a small and
separate sound.  When he heard it he rushed forward as if to
plunge into that furnace, but Turnbull arrested him by an elbow.

"Let me go!" cried Evan, in agony; "it's the poor old beggar's
voice--he's still alive, and shouting for help."

"Listen!" said Turnbull, and lifted one finger from his clenched
hand.

"Or else he is shrieking with pain," protested MacIan.  "I will
not endure it."

"Listen!" repeated Turnbull, grimly.  "Did you ever hear anyone
shout for help or shriek with pain in that voice?"

The small shrill sounds which came through the crash of the
conflagration were indeed of an odd sort, and MacIan turned a
face of puzzled inquiry to his companion.

"He is singing," said Turnbull, simply.

A remaining rampart fell, crushing the fire, and through the
diminished din of it the voice of the little old lunatic came
clearer.  In the heart of that white-hot hell he was singing like
a bird.  What he was singing it was not very easy to follow, but
it seemed to be something about playing in the golden hay.

"Good Lord!" cried Turnbull, bitterly, "there seem to be some
advantages in really being an idiot."  Then advancing to the
fringe of the fire he called out on chance to the invisible
singer: "Can you come out?  Are you cut off?"

"God help us all!" said MacIan, with a shudder; "he's laughing
now."

At whatever stage of being burned alive the invisible now found
himself, he was now shaking out peals of silvery and hilarious
laughter.  As he listened, MacIan's two eyes began to glow, as if
a strange thought had come into his head.

"Fool, come out and save yourself!" shouted Turnbull.

"No, by Heaven! that is not the way," cried Evan, suddenly.
"Father," he shouted, "come out and save us all!"

The fire, though it had dropped in one or two places, was, upon
the whole, higher and more unconquerable than ever.  Separate tall
flames shot up and spread out above them like the fiery cloisters
of some infernal cathedral, or like a grove of red tropical trees
in the garden of the devil.  Higher yet in the purple hollow of
the night the topmost flames leapt again and again fruitlessly at
the stars, like golden dragons chained but struggling.  The towers
and domes of the oppressive smoke seemed high and far enough to
drown distant planets in a London fog.  But if we exhausted all
frantic similes for that frantic scene, the main impression about
the fire would still be its ranked upstanding rigidity and a sort
of roaring stillness.  It was literally a wall of fire.

"Father," cried MacIan, once more, "come out of it and save us
all!"  Turnbull was staring at him as he cried.

The tall and steady forest of fire must have been already a
portent visible to the whole circle of land and sea.  The red
flush of it lit up the long sides of white ships far out in the
German Ocean, and picked out like piercing rubies the windows in
the villages on the distant heights.  If any villagers or sailors
were looking towards it they must have seen a strange sight as
MacIan cried out for the third time.

That forest of fire wavered, and was cloven in the centre; and
then the whole of one half of it leaned one way as a cornfield
leans all one way under the load of the wind.  Indeed, it looked
as if a great wind had sprung up and driven the great fire
aslant.  Its smoke was no longer sent up to choke the stars, but
was trailed and dragged across county after county like one
dreadful banner of defeat.

But it was not the wind; or, if it was the wind, it was two
winds blowing in opposite directions.  For while one half of the
huge fire sloped one way towards the inland heights, the other
half, at exactly the same angle, sloped out eastward towards the
sea.  So that earth and ocean could behold, where there had been a
mere fiery mass, a thing divided like a V--a cloven tongue of
flame.  But if it were a prodigy for those distant, it was
something beyond speech for those quite near.  As the echoes of
Evan's last appeal rang and died in the universal uproar, the
fiery vault over his head opened down the middle, and, reeling
back in two great golden billows, hung on each side as huge and
harmless as two sloping hills lie on each side of a valley.  Down
the centre of this trough, or chasm, a little path ran, cleared
of all but ashes, and down this little path was walking a little
old man singing as if he were alone in a wood in spring.

When James Turnbull saw this he suddenly put out a hand and
seemed to support himself on the strong shoulder of Madeleine
Durand.  Then after a moment's hesitation he put his other hand on
the shoulder of MacIan.  His blue eyes looked extraordinarily
brilliant and beautiful.  In many sceptical papers and magazines
afterwards he was sadly or sternly rebuked for having abandoned
the certainties of materialism.  All his life up to that moment he
had been most honestly certain that materialism was a fact.  But
he was unlike the writers in the magazines precisely in this--
that he preferred a fact even to materialism.

As the little singing figure came nearer and nearer, Evan fell on
his knees, and after an instant Beatrice followed; then Madeleine
fell on her knees, and after a longer instant Turnbull followed.
Then the little old man went past them singing down that corridor
of flames.  They had not looked at his face.

When he had passed they looked up.  While the first light of the
fire had shot east and west, painting the sides of ships with
fire-light or striking red sparks out of windowed houses, it had
not hitherto struck upward, for there was above it the ponderous
and rococo cavern of its own monstrous coloured smoke.  But now
the fire was turned to left and right like a woman's hair parted
in the middle, and now the shafts of its light could shoot up
into empty heavens and strike anything, either bird or cloud.  But
it struck something that was neither cloud nor bird.  Far, far
away up in those huge hollows of space something was flying
swiftly and shining brightly, something that shone too bright and
flew too fast to be any of the fowls of the air, though the red
light lit it from underneath like the breast of a bird.  Everyone
knew it was a flying ship, and everyone knew whose.

As they stared upward the little speck of light seemed slightly
tilted, and two black dots dropped from the edge of it.  All the
eager, upturned faces watched the two dots as they grew bigger
and bigger in their downward rush.  Then someone screamed, and no
one looked up any more.  For the two bodies, larger every second
flying, spread out and sprawling in the fire-light, were the dead
bodies of the two doctors whom Professor Lucifer had carried with
him--the weak and sneering Quayle, the cold and clumsy Hutton.
They went with a crash into the thick of the fire.

"They are gone!" screamed Beatrice, hiding her head.  "O God!  The
are lost!"

Evan put his arm about her, and remembered his own vision.

"No, they are not lost," he said.  "They are saved.  He has taken
away no souls with him, after all."

He looked vaguely about at the fire that was already fading, and
there among the ashes lay two shining things that had survived
the fire, his sword and Turnbull's, fallen haphazard in the
pattern of a cross.








End of Project Gutenberg's The Ball and The Cross, by G.K. Chesterton

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BALL AND THE CROSS ***

This file should be named bllcr10.txt or bllcr10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, bllcr11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, bllcr10a.txt

Produced by Ben Crowder <crowderb@blankslate.net>

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]



THE consulting-rooms of Dr Orion Hood, the eminent criminologist
and specialist in certain moral disorders, lay along the sea-front
at Scarborough, in a series of very large and well-lighted french windows,
which showed the North Sea like one endless outer wall of blue-green marble.
In such a place the sea had something of the monotony of a blue-green dado:
for the chambers themselves were ruled throughout by a terrible tidiness
not unlike the terrible tidiness of the sea.  It must not be supposed
that Dr Hood's apartments excluded luxury, or even poetry.
These things were there, in their place; but one felt that
they were never allowed out of their place.  Luxury was there:
there stood upon a special table eight or ten boxes of the best cigars;
but they were built upon a plan so that the strongest were always
nearest the wall and the mildest nearest the window.  A tantalus
containing three kinds of spirit, all of a liqueur excellence,
stood always on this table of luxury; but the fanciful have asserted
that the whisky, brandy, and rum seemed always to stand at the same level.
Poetry was there:  the left-hand corner of the room was lined with
as complete a set of English classics as the right hand could show
of English and foreign physiologists.  But if one took a volume
of Chaucer or Shelley from that rank, its absence irritated the mind
like a gap in a man's front teeth.  One could not say the books
were never read; probably they were, but there was a sense of their
being chained to their places, like the Bibles in the old churches.
Dr Hood treated his private book-shelf as if it were a public library.
And if this strict scientific intangibility steeped even the shelves
laden with lyrics and ballads and the tables laden with drink and tobacco,
it goes without saying that yet more of such heathen holiness
protected the other shelves that held the specialist's library,
and the other tables that sustained the frail and even fairylike
instruments of chemistry or mechanics.

     Dr Hood paced the length of his string of apartments, bounded--
as the boys' geographies say--on the east by the North Sea and on the west
by the serried ranks of his sociological and criminologist library.
He was clad in an artist's velvet, but with none of an artist's negligence;
his hair was heavily shot with grey, but growing thick and healthy;
his face was lean, but sanguine and expectant.  Everything about him
and his room indicated something at once rigid and restless,
like that great northern sea by which (on pure principles of hygiene)
he had built his home.

     Fate, being in a funny mood, pushed the door open and
introduced into those long, strict, sea-flanked apartments
one who was perhaps the most startling opposite of them and their master.
In answer to a curt but civil summons, the door opened inwards
and there shambled into the room a shapeless little figure,
which seemed to find its own hat and umbrella as unmanageable as
a mass of luggage.  The umbrella was a black and prosaic bundle
long past repair; the hat was a broad-curved black hat, clerical
but not common in England; the man was the very embodiment of all
that is homely and helpless.

     The doctor regarded the new-comer with a restrained astonishment,
not unlike that he would have shown if some huge but obviously
harmless sea-beast had crawled into his room.  The new-comer
regarded the doctor with that beaming but breathless geniality
which characterizes a corpulent charwoman who has just managed
to stuff herself into an omnibus.  It is a rich confusion of
social self-congratulation and bodily disarray.  His hat tumbled
to the carpet, his heavy umbrella slipped between his knees with a thud;
he reached after the one and ducked after the other, but with
an unimpaired smile on his round face spoke simultaneously as follows:

     "My name is Brown.  Pray excuse me.  I've come about
that business of the MacNabs.  I have heard, you often help people
out of such troubles.  Pray excuse me if I am wrong."

     By this time he had sprawlingly recovered the hat, and made
an odd little bobbing bow over it, as if setting everything quite right.

     "I hardly understand you," replied the scientist, with
a cold intensity of manner.  "I fear you have mistaken the chambers.
I am Dr Hood, and my work is almost entirely literary and educational.
It is true that I have sometimes been consulted by the police
in cases of peculiar difficulty and importance, but--"

     "Oh, this is of the greatest importance," broke in the little man
called Brown.  "Why, her mother won't let them get engaged."
And he leaned back in his chair in radiant rationality.

     The brows of Dr Hood were drawn down darkly, but the eyes
under them were bright with something that might be anger or
might be amusement.  "And still," he said, "I do not quite understand."

     "You see, they want to get married," said the man with the
clerical hat.  "Maggie MacNab and young Todhunter want to get married.
Now, what can be more important than that?"

     The great Orion Hood's scientific triumphs had deprived him
of many things--some said of his health, others of his God;
but they had not wholly despoiled him of his sense of the absurd.
At the last plea of the ingenuous priest a chuckle broke out of him
from inside, and he threw himself into an arm-chair in an ironical attitude
of the consulting physician.

     "Mr Brown," he said gravely, "it is quite fourteen and a half years
since I was personally asked to test a personal problem: then it was
the case of an attempt to poison the French President at
a Lord Mayor's Banquet.  It is now, I understand, a question of whether
some friend of yours called Maggie is a suitable fiancee for some friend
of hers called Todhunter.  Well, Mr Brown, I am a sportsman.
I will take it on.  I will give the MacNab family my best advice,
as good as I gave the French Republic and the King of England--no, better:
fourteen years better.  I have nothing else to do this afternoon.
Tell me your story."

     The little clergyman called Brown thanked him with
unquestionable warmth, but still with a queer kind of simplicity.
It was rather as if he were thanking a stranger in a smoking-room
for some trouble in passing the matches, than as if he were (as he was)
practically thanking the Curator of Kew Gardens for coming with him
into a field to find a four-leaved clover.  With scarcely a semi-colon
after his hearty thanks, the little man began his recital:

     "I told you my name was Brown; well, that's the fact,
and I'm the priest of the little Catholic Church I dare say you've seen
beyond those straggly streets, where the town ends towards the north.
In the last and straggliest of those streets which runs along the sea
like a sea-wall there is a very honest but rather sharp-tempered
member of my flock, a widow called MacNab.  She has one daughter,
and she lets lodgings, and between her and the daughter,
and between her and the lodgers--well, I dare say there is a great deal
to be said on both sides.  At present she has only one lodger,
the young man called Todhunter; but he has given more trouble
than all the rest, for he wants to marry the young woman of the house."

     "And the young woman of the house," asked Dr Hood, with huge and
silent amusement, "what does she want?"

     "Why, she wants to marry him," cried Father Brown, sitting up eagerly.
"That is just the awful complication."

     "It is indeed a hideous enigma," said Dr Hood.

     "This young James Todhunter," continued the cleric,
"is a very decent man so far as I know; but then nobody knows very much.
He is a bright, brownish little fellow, agile like a monkey,
clean-shaven like an actor, and obliging like a born courtier.
He seems to have quite a pocketful of money, but nobody knows what
his trade is.  Mrs MacNab, therefore (being of a pessimistic turn),
is quite sure it is something dreadful, and probably connected with dynamite.
The dynamite must be of a shy and noiseless sort, for the poor fellow
only shuts himself up for several hours of the day and studies something
behind a locked door.  He declares his privacy is temporary and justified,
and promises to explain before the wedding.  That is all that anyone knows
for certain, but Mrs MacNab will tell you a great deal more than
even she is certain of.  You know how the tales grow like grass on
such a patch of ignorance as that.  There are tales of two voices
heard talking in the room; though, when the door is opened,
Todhunter is always found alone.  There are tales of a mysterious
tall man in a silk hat, who once came out of the sea-mists and
apparently out of the sea, stepping softly across the sandy fields and
through the small back garden at twilight, till he was heard
talking to the lodger at his open window.  The colloquy seemed to end
in a quarrel.  Todhunter dashed down his window with violence,
and the man in the high hat melted into the sea-fog again.
This story is told by the family with the fiercest mystification;
but I really think Mrs MacNab prefers her own original tale:
that the Other Man (or whatever it is) crawls out every night from the
big box in the corner, which is kept locked all day.  You see,
therefore, how this sealed door of Todhunter's is treated as the gate
of all the fancies and monstrosities of the `Thousand and One Nights'.
And yet there is the little fellow in his respectable black jacket,
as punctual and innocent as a parlour clock.  He pays his rent to the tick;
he is practically a teetotaller; he is tirelessly kind with
the younger children, and can keep them amused for a day on end; and,
last and most urgent of all, he has made himself equally popular with
the eldest daughter, who is ready to go to church with him tomorrow."

     A man warmly concerned with any large theories has always
a relish for applying them to any triviality.  The great specialist
having condescended to the priest's simplicity, condescended expansively.
He settled himself with comfort in his arm-chair and began to talk in
the tone of a somewhat absent-minded lecturer:

     "Even in a minute instance, it is best to look first to
the main tendencies of Nature.  A particular flower may not be dead
in early winter, but the flowers are dying; a particular pebble
may never be wetted with the tide, but the tide is coming in.
To the scientific eye all human history is a series of collective movements,
destructions or migrations, like the massacre of flies in winter
or the return of birds in spring.  Now the root fact in all history is Race.
Race produces religion; Race produces legal and ethical wars.
There is no stronger case than that of the wild, unworldly and
perishing stock which we commonly call the Celts, of whom your friends
the MacNabs are specimens.  Small, swarthy, and of this dreamy and
drifting blood, they accept easily the superstitious explanation of
any incidents, just as they still accept (you will excuse me for saying)
that superstitious explanation of all incidents which you
and your Church represent.  It is not remarkable that such people,
with the sea moaning behind them and the Church (excuse me again)
droning in front of them, should put fantastic features into what are
probably plain events.  You, with your small parochial responsibilities,
see only this particular Mrs MacNab, terrified with this particular tale
of two voices and a tall man out of the sea.  But the man with
the scientific imagination sees, as it were, the whole clans of MacNab
scattered over the whole world, in its ultimate average as uniform
as a tribe of birds.  He sees thousands of Mrs MacNabs,
in thousands of houses, dropping their little drop of morbidity
in the tea-cups of their friends; he sees--"

     Before the scientist could conclude his sentence, another and
more impatient summons sounded from without; someone with swishing skirts
was marshalled hurriedly down the corridor, and the door opened on
a young girl, decently dressed but disordered and red-hot with haste.
She had sea-blown blonde hair, and would have been entirely beautiful
if her cheek-bones had not been, in the Scotch manner, a little
high in relief as well as in colour.  Her apology was almost as abrupt
as a command.

     "I'm sorry to interrupt you, sir," she said, "but I had to follow
Father Brown at once; it's nothing less than life or death."

     Father Brown began to get to his feet in some disorder.
"Why, what has happened, Maggie?" he said.

     "James has been murdered, for all I can make out,"
answered the girl, still breathing hard from her rush.  "That man Glass
has been with him again; I heard them talking through the door quite plain.
Two separate voices:  for James speaks low, with a burr,
and the other voice was high and quavery."

     "That man Glass?" repeated the priest in some perplexity.

     "I know his name is Glass," answered the girl, in great impatience.
"I heard it through the door.  They were quarrelling--about money,
I think--for I heard James say again and again, `That's right, Mr Glass,'
or `No, Mr Glass,' and then, `Two or three, Mr Glass.'  But we're talking
too much; you must come at once, and there may be time yet."

     "But time for what?" asked Dr Hood, who had been studying
the young lady with marked interest.  "What is there about Mr Glass
and his money troubles that should impel such urgency?"

     "I tried to break down the door and couldn't," answered the girl shortly,
"Then I ran to the back-yard, and managed to climb on to the window-sill
that looks into the room.  It was an dim, and seemed to be empty,
but I swear I saw James lying huddled up in a corner, as if he were
drugged or strangled."

     "This is very serious," said Father Brown, gathering his errant hat
and umbrella and standing up; "in point of fact I was just putting
your case before this gentleman, and his view--"

     "Has been largely altered," said the scientist gravely.
"I do not think this young lady is so Celtic as I had supposed.
As I have nothing else to do, I will put on my hat and stroll
down town with you."

     In a few minutes all three were approaching the dreary tail of
the MacNabs' street:  the girl with the stern and breathless stride
of the mountaineer, the criminologist with a lounging grace (which was
not without a certain leopard-like swiftness), and the priest at an
energetic trot entirely devoid of distinction.  The aspect of this
edge of the town was not entirely without justification for
the doctor's hints about desolate moods and environments.
The scattered houses stood farther and farther apart in a broken string
along the seashore; the afternoon was closing with a premature and
partly lurid twilight; the sea was of an inky purple and murmuring ominously.
In the scrappy back garden of the MacNabs which ran down towards the sand,
two black, barren-looking trees stood up like demon hands held up
in astonishment, and as Mrs MacNab ran down the street to meet them
with lean hands similarly spread, and her fierce face in shadow,
she was a little like a demon herself.  The doctor and the priest
made scant reply to her shrill reiterations of her daughter's story,
with more disturbing details of her own, to the divided vows of vengeance
against Mr Glass for murdering, and against Mr Todhunter for being murdered,
or against the latter for having dared to want to marry her daughter,
and for not having lived to do it.  They passed through the narrow passage
in the front of the house until they came to the lodger's door at the back,
and there Dr Hood, with the trick of an old detective, put his shoulder
sharply to the panel and burst in the door.

     It opened on a scene of silent catastrophe.  No one seeing it,
even for a flash, could doubt that the room had been the theatre
of some thrilling collision between two, or perhaps more, persons.
Playing-cards lay littered across the table or fluttered about
the floor as if a game had been interrupted.  Two wine glasses stood
ready for wine on a side-table, but a third lay smashed
in a star of crystal upon the carpet.  A few feet from it lay
what looked like a long knife or short sword, straight,
but with an ornamental and pictured handle, its dull blade just caught
a grey glint from the dreary window behind, which showed the black trees
against the leaden level of the sea.  Towards the opposite corner
of the room was rolled a gentleman's silk top hat, as if it had
just been knocked off his head; so much so, indeed, that one almost looked
to see it still rolling.  And in the corner behind it, thrown like a sack
of potatoes, but corded like a railway trunk, lay Mr James Todhunter,
with a scarf across his mouth, and six or seven ropes knotted round
his elbows and ankles.  His brown eyes were alive and shifted alertly.

     Dr Orion Hood paused for one instant on the doormat and drank in
the whole scene of voiceless violence.  Then he stepped swiftly
across the carpet, picked up the tall silk hat, and gravely put it
upon the head of the yet pinioned Todhunter.  It was so much too large
for him that it almost slipped down on to his shoulders.

     "Mr Glass's hat," said the doctor, returning with it and peering
into the inside with a pocket lens.  "How to explain the absence
of Mr Glass and the presence of Mr Glass's hat?  For Mr Glass is not a
careless man with his clothes.  That hat is of a stylish shape and
systematically brushed and burnished, though not very new.
An old dandy, I should think."

     "But, good heavens!" called out Miss MacNab, "aren't you going to
untie the man first?"

     "I say `old' with intention, though not with certainty"
continued the expositor; "my reason for it might seem a little far-fetched.
The hair of human beings falls out in very varying degrees,
but almost always falls out slightly, and with the lens I should see
the tiny hairs in a hat recently worn.  It has none, which leads me
to guess that Mr Glass is bald.  Now when this is taken with
the high-pitched and querulous voice which Miss MacNab described
so vividly (patience, my dear lady, patience), when we take
the hairless head together with the tone common in senile anger,
I should think we may deduce some advance in years.  Nevertheless,
he was probably vigorous, and he was almost certainly tall.
I might rely in some degree on the story of his previous appearance
at the window, as a tall man in a silk hat, but I think I have
more exact indication.  This wineglass has been smashed all over the place,
but one of its splinters lies on the high bracket beside the mantelpiece.
No such fragment could have fallen there if the vessel had been smashed
in the hand of a comparatively short man like Mr Todhunter."

     "By the way," said Father Brown, "might it not be as well
to untie Mr Todhunter?"

     "Our lesson from the drinking-vessels does not end here,"
proceeded the specialist.  "I may say at once that it is possible
that the man Glass was bald or nervous through dissipation rather than age.
Mr Todhunter, as has been remarked, is a quiet thrifty gentleman,
essentially an abstainer.  These cards and wine-cups are no part
of his normal habit; they have been produced for a particular companion.
But, as it happens, we may go farther.  Mr Todhunter may or may not
possess this wine-service, but there is no appearance of his
possessing any wine.  What, then, were these vessels to contain?
I would at once suggest some brandy or whisky, perhaps of a luxurious sort,
from a flask in the pocket of Mr Glass.  We have thus something like
a picture of the man, or at least of the type:  tall, elderly, fashionable,
but somewhat frayed, certainly fond of play and strong waters,
perhaps rather too fond of them Mr Glass is a gentleman not unknown
on the fringes of society."

     "Look here," cried the young woman, "if you don't let me pass to
untie him I'll run outside and scream for the police."

     "I should not advise you, Miss MacNab," said Dr Hood gravely,
"to be in any hurry to fetch the police.  Father Brown,
I seriously ask you to compose your flock, for their sakes, not for mine.
Well, we have seen something of the figure and quality of Mr Glass;
what are the chief facts known of Mr Todhunter?  They are substantially three:
that he is economical, that he is more or less wealthy, and that
he has a secret.  Now, surely it is obvious that there are
the three chief marks of the kind of man who is blackmailed.
And surely it is equally obvious that the faded finery,
the profligate habits, and the shrill irritation of Mr Glass
are the unmistakable marks of the kind of man who blackmails him.
We have the two typical figures of a tragedy of hush money:
on the one hand, the respectable man with a mystery; on the other,
the West-end vulture with a scent for a mystery.  These two men
have met here today and have quarrelled, using blows and a bare weapon."

     "Are you going to take those ropes off?" asked the girl stubbornly.

     Dr Hood replaced the silk hat carefully on the side table,
and went across to the captive.  He studied him intently,
even moving him a little and half-turning him round by the shoulders,
but he only answered:

     "No; I think these ropes will do very well till your friends
the police bring the handcuffs."

     Father Brown, who had been looking dully at the carpet,
lifted his round face and said:  "What do you mean?"

     The man of science had picked up the peculiar dagger-sword
from the carpet and was examining it intently as he answered:

     "Because you find Mr Todhunter tied up," he said, "you all jump
to the conclusion that Mr Glass had tied him up; and then, I suppose,
escaped.  There are four objections to this: First, why should a gentleman
so dressy as our friend Glass leave his hat behind him, if he left
of his own free will? Second," he continued, moving towards the window,
"this is the only exit, and it is locked on the inside.  Third, this
blade here has a tiny touch of blood at the point, but there is
no wound on Mr Todhunter.  Mr Glass took that wound away with him,
dead or alive.  Add to all this primary probability.
It is much more likely that the blackmailed person would try to kill
his incubus, rather than that the blackmailer would try to kill
the goose that lays his golden egg.  There, I think, we have
a pretty complete story."

     "But the ropes?" inquired the priest, whose eyes had remained
open with a rather vacant admiration.

     "Ah, the ropes," said the expert with a singular intonation.
"Miss MacNab very much wanted to know why I did not set Mr Todhunter
free from his ropes.  Well, I will tell her.  I did not do it because
Mr Todhunter can set himself free from them at any minute he chooses."

     "What?" cried the audience on quite different notes of astonishment.

     "I have looked at all the knots on Mr Todhunter," reiterated Hood
quietly.  "I happen to know something about knots; they are quite
a branch of criminal science.  Every one of those knots he has
made himself and could loosen himself; not one of them would have been made
by an enemy really trying to pinion him.  The whole of this affair
of the ropes is a clever fake, to make us think him the victim of
the struggle instead of the wretched Glass, whose corpse may be hidden
in the garden or stuffed up the chimney."

     There was a rather depressed silence; the room was darkening,
the sea-blighted boughs of the garden trees looked leaner and
blacker than ever, yet they seemed to have come nearer to the window.
One could almost fancy they were sea-monsters like krakens or cuttlefish,
writhing polypi who had crawled up from the sea to see the end
of this tragedy, even as he, the villain and victim of it,
the terrible man in the tall hat, had once crawled up from the sea.
For the whole air was dense with the morbidity of blackmail, which is
the most morbid of human things, because it is a crime concealing a crime;
a black plaster on a blacker wound.

     The face of the little Catholic priest, which was commonly complacent
and even comic, had suddenly become knotted with a curious frown.
It was not the blank curiosity of his first innocence.  It was rather
that creative curiosity which comes when a man has the beginnings of
an idea.  "Say it again, please," he said in a simple, bothered manner;
"do you mean that Todhunter can tie himself up all alone and
untie himself all alone?"

     "That is what I mean," said the doctor.

     "Jerusalem!"  ejaculated Brown suddenly, "I wonder if it could
possibly be that!"

     He scuttled across the room rather like a rabbit, and peered with
quite a new impulsiveness into the partially-covered face of the captive.
Then he turned his own rather fatuous face to the company.
"Yes, that's it!" he cried in a certain excitement.  "Can't you see it
in the man's face?  Why, look at his eyes!"

     Both the Professor and the girl followed the direction of his glance.
And though the broad black scarf completely masked the lower half
of Todhunter's visage, they did grow conscious of something struggling
and intense about the upper part of it.

     "His eyes do look queer," cried the young woman, strongly moved.
"You brutes; I believe it's hurting him!"

     "Not that, I think," said Dr Hood; "the eyes have certainly
a singular expression.  But I should interpret those transverse
wrinkles as expressing rather such slight psychological abnormality--"

     "Oh, bosh!" cried Father Brown:  "can't you see he's laughing?"

     "Laughing!" repeated the doctor, with a start; "but what on earth
can he be laughing at?"

     "Well," replied the Reverend Brown apologetically,
"not to put too fine a point on it, I think he is laughing at you.
And indeed, I'm a little inclined to laugh at myself, now I know about it."

     "Now you know about what?" asked Hood, in some exasperation.

     "Now I know," replied the priest, "the profession of Mr Todhunter."

     He shuffled about the room, looking at one object after another
with what seemed to be a vacant stare, and then invariably bursting
into an equally vacant laugh, a highly irritating process for those
who had to watch it.  He laughed very much over the hat,
still more uproariously over the broken glass, but the blood on
the sword point sent him into mortal convulsions of amusement.
Then he turned to the fuming specialist.

     "Dr Hood," he cried enthusiastically, "you are a great poet!
You have called an uncreated being out of the void.  How much more godlike
that is than if you had only ferreted out the mere facts!
Indeed, the mere facts are rather commonplace and comic by comparison."

     "I have no notion what you are talking about," said Dr Hood
rather haughtily; "my facts are all inevitable, though necessarily incomplete.
A place may be permitted to intuition, perhaps (or poetry if you
prefer the term), but only because the corresponding details cannot
as yet be ascertained.  In the absence of Mr Glass--"

     "That's it, that's it," said the little priest, nodding quite eagerly,
"that's the first idea to get fixed; the absence of Mr Glass.
He is so extremely absent.  I suppose," he added reflectively,
"that there was never anybody so absent as Mr Glass."

     "Do you mean he is absent from the town?" demanded the doctor.

     "I mean he is absent from everywhere," answered Father Brown;
"he is absent from the Nature of Things, so to speak."

     "Do you seriously mean," said the specialist with a smile,
"that there is no such person?"

     The priest made a sign of assent.  "It does seem a pity," he said.

     Orion Hood broke into a contemptuous laugh.  "Well," he said,
"before we go on to the hundred and one other evidences, let us take
the first proof we found; the first fact we fell over when we fell
into this room.  If there is no Mr Glass, whose hat is this?"

     "It is Mr Todhunter's," replied Father Brown.

     "But it doesn't fit him," cried Hood impatiently.  "He couldn't
possibly wear it!"

     Father Brown shook his head with ineffable mildness.
"I never said he could wear it," he answered.  "I said it was his hat.
Or, if you insist on a shade of difference, a hat that is his."

     "And what is the shade of difference?" asked the criminologist
with a slight sneer.

     "My good sir," cried the mild little man, with his first movement
akin to impatience, "if you will walk down the street to the nearest
hatter's shop, you will see that there is, in common speech,
a difference between a man's hat and the hats that are his."

     "But a hatter," protested Hood, "can get money out of his
stock of new hats.  What could Todhunter get out of this one old hat?"

     "Rabbits," replied Father Brown promptly.

     "What?" cried Dr Hood.

     "Rabbits, ribbons, sweetmeats, goldfish, rolls of coloured paper,"
said the reverend gentleman with rapidity.  "Didn't you see it all
when you found out the faked ropes?  It's just the same with the sword.
Mr Todhunter hasn't got a scratch on him, as you say; but he's got
a scratch in him, if you follow me."

     "Do you mean inside Mr Todhunter's clothes?" inquired
Mrs MacNab sternly.

     "I do not mean inside Mr Todhunter's clothes," said Father Brown.
"I mean inside Mr Todhunter."

     "Well, what in the name of Bedlam do you mean?"

     "Mr Todhunter," explained Father Brown placidly, "is learning
to be a professional conjurer, as well as juggler, ventriloquist,
and expert in the rope trick.  The conjuring explains the hat.
It is without traces of hair, not because it is worn by
the prematurely bald Mr Glass, but because it has never been worn
by anybody.  The juggling explains the three glasses, which Todhunter
was teaching himself to throw up and catch in rotation.
But, being only at the stage of practice, he smashed one glass
against the ceiling.  And the juggling also explains the sword,
which it was Mr Todhunter's professional pride and duty to swallow.
But, again, being at the stage of practice, he very slightly grazed
the inside of his throat with the weapon.  Hence he has a wound
inside him, which I am sure (from the expression on his face)
is not a serious one.  He was also practising the trick of
a release from ropes, like the Davenport Brothers, and he was just about
to free himself when we all burst into the room.  The cards, of course,
are for card tricks, and they are scattered on the floor because
he had just been practising one of those dodges of sending them
flying through the air.  He merely kept his trade secret,
because he had to keep his tricks secret, like any other conjurer.
But the mere fact of an idler in a top hat having once looked in
at his back window, and been driven away by him with great indignation,
was enough to set us all on a wrong track of romance, and make us imagine
his whole life overshadowed by the silk-hatted spectre of Mr Glass."

     "But What about the two voices?" asked Maggie, staring.

     "Have you never heard a ventriloquist?" asked Father Brown.
"Don't you know they speak first in their natural voice, and then
answer themselves in just that shrill, squeaky, unnatural voice
that you heard?"

     There was a long silence, and Dr Hood regarded the little man
who had spoken with a dark and attentive smile.  "You are certainly
a very ingenious person," he said; "it could not have been done better
in a book.  But there is just one part of Mr Glass you have not succeeded
in explaining away, and that is his name.  Miss MacNab distinctly
heard him so addressed by Mr Todhunter."

     The Rev.  Mr Brown broke into a rather childish giggle.
"Well, that," he said, "that's the silliest part of the whole silly story.
When our juggling friend here threw up the three glasses in turn,
he counted them aloud as he caught them, and also commented aloud
when he failed to catch them.  What he really said was:  `One, two
and three--missed a glass one, two--missed a glass.'  And so on."

     There was a second of stillness in the room, and then everyone
with one accord burst out laughing.  As they did so the figure
in the corner complacently uncoiled all the ropes and let them fall
with a flourish.  Then, advancing into the middle of the room with a bow,
he produced from his pocket a big bill printed in blue and red,
which announced that ZALADIN, the World's Greatest Conjurer,
Contortionist, Ventriloquist and Human Kangaroo would be ready
with an entirely new series of Tricks at the Empire Pavilion,
Scarborough, on Monday next at eight o'clock precisely.



II. The Paradise of Thieves


THE great Muscari, most original of the young Tuscan poets,
walked swiftly into his favourite restaurant, which overlooked
the Mediterranean, was covered by an awning and fenced by little lemon
and orange trees.  Waiters in white aprons were already laying out
on white tables the insignia of an early and elegant lunch;
and this seemed to increase a satisfaction that already touched
the top of swagger.  Muscari had an eagle nose like Dante;
his hair and neckerchief were dark and flowing; he carried a black cloak,
and might almost have carried a black mask, so much did he bear with him
a sort of Venetian melodrama.  He acted as if a troubadour had still
a definite social office, like a bishop.  He went as near as
his century permitted to walking the world literally like Don Juan,
with rapier and guitar.

     For he never travelled without a case of swords, with which
he had fought many brilliant duels, or without a corresponding case
for his mandolin, with which he had actually serenaded Miss Ethel Harrogate,
the highly conventional daughter of a Yorkshire banker on a holiday.
Yet he was neither a charlatan nor a child; but a hot, logical Latin
who liked a certain thing and was it.  His poetry was as straightforward
as anyone else's prose.  He desired fame or wine or the beauty of women
with a torrid directness inconceivable among the cloudy ideals
or cloudy compromises of the north; to vaguer races his intensity
smelt of danger or even crime.  Like fire or the sea, he was too simple
to be trusted.

     The banker and his beautiful English daughter were staying
at the hotel attached to Muscari's restaurant; that was why it was
his favourite restaurant.  A glance flashed around the room
told him at once, however, that the English party had not descended.
The restaurant was glittering, but still comparatively empty.
Two priests were talking at a table in a corner, but Muscari
(an ardent Catholic) took no more notice of them than of a couple of crows.
But from a yet farther seat, partly concealed behind a dwarf tree
golden with oranges, there rose and advanced towards the poet a person
whose costume was the most aggressively opposite to his own.

     This figure was clad in tweeds of a piebald check, with a pink tie,
a sharp collar and protuberant yellow boots.  He contrived,
in the true tradition of 'Arry at Margate, to look at once startling
and commonplace.  But as the Cockney apparition drew nearer,
Muscari was astounded to observe that the head was distinctly
different from the body.  It was an Italian head: fuzzy, swarthy and
very vivacious, that rose abruptly out of the standing collar
like cardboard and the comic pink tie.  In fact it was a head he knew.
He recognized it, above all the dire erection of English holiday array,
as the face of an old but forgotten friend name Ezza.  This youth
had been a prodigy at college, and European fame was promised him
when he was barely fifteen; but when he appeared in the world he failed,
first publicly as a dramatist and a demagogue, and then privately
for years on end as an actor, a traveller, a commission agent
or a journalist.  Muscari had known him last behind the footlights;
he was but too well attuned to the excitements of that profession,
and it was believed that some moral calamity had swallowed him up.

     "Ezza!" cried the poet, rising and shaking hands in
a pleasant astonishment.  "Well, I've seen you in many costumes
in the green room; but I never expected to see you dressed up
as an Englishman."

     "This," answered Ezza gravely, "is not the costume of an Englishman,
but of the Italian of the future."

     "In that case," remarked Muscari, "I confess I prefer
the Italian of the past."

     "That is your old mistake, Muscari," said the man in tweeds,
shaking his head; "and the mistake of Italy.  In the sixteenth century
we Tuscans made the morning:  we had the newest steel, the newest carving,
the newest chemistry.  Why should we not now have the newest factories,
the newest motors, the newest finance--the newest clothes?"

     "Because they are not worth having," answered Muscari.
"You cannot make Italians really progressive; they are too intelligent.
Men who see the short cut to good living will never go by
the new elaborate roads."

     "Well, to me Marconi, or D'Annunzio, is the star of Italy"
said the other.  "That is why I have become a Futurist--and a courier."

     "A courier!" cried Muscari, laughing.  "Is that the last of your
list of trades?  And whom are you conducting?"

     "Oh, a man of the name of Harrogate, and his family, I believe."

     "Not the banker in this hotel?" inquired the poet,
with some eagerness.

     "That's the man," answered the courier.

     "Does it pay well?" asked the troubadour innocently.

     "It will pay me," said Ezza, with a very enigmatic smile.
"But I am a rather curious sort of courier."  Then, as if
changing the subject, he said abruptly:  "He has a daughter--and a son."

     "The daughter is divine," affirmed Muscari, "the father and son are,
I suppose, human.  But granted his harmless qualities doesn't that banker
strike you as a splendid instance of my argument?  Harrogate has millions
in his safes, and I have--the hole in my pocket.  But you daren't say--
you can't say--that he's cleverer than I, or bolder than I, or even
more energetic.  He's not clever, he's got eyes like blue buttons;
he's not energetic, he moves from chair to chair like a paralytic.
He's a conscientious, kindly old blockhead; but he's got money simply
because he collects money, as a boy collects stamps.
You're too strong-minded for business, Ezza.  You won't get on.
To be clever enough to get all that money, one must be stupid enough
to want it."

     "I'm stupid enough for that," said Ezza gloomily.  "But I should
suggest a suspension of your critique of the banker, for here he comes."

     Mr Harrogate, the great financier, did indeed enter the room,
but nobody looked at him.  He was a massive elderly man with
a boiled blue eye and faded grey-sandy moustaches; but for
his heavy stoop he might have been a colonel.  He carried several
unopened letters in his hand.  His son Frank was a really fine lad,
curly-haired, sun-burnt and strenuous; but nobody looked at him either.
All eyes, as usual, were riveted, for the moment at least,
upon Ethel Harrogate, whose golden Greek head and colour of the dawn
seemed set purposely above that sapphire sea, like a goddess's.
The poet Muscari drew a deep breath as if he were drinking something,
as indeed he was.  He was drinking the Classic; which his fathers made.
Ezza studied her with a gaze equally intense and far more baffling.

     Miss Harrogate was specially radiant and ready for conversation
on this occasion; and her family had fallen into the easier
Continental habit, allowing the stranger Muscari and even
the courier Ezza to share their table and their talk.  In Ethel Harrogate
conventionality crowned itself with a perfection and splendour of its own.
Proud of her father's prosperity, fond of fashionable pleasures,
a fond daughter but an arrant flirt, she was all these things with
a sort of golden good-nature that made her very pride pleasing
and her worldly respectability a fresh and hearty thing.

     They were in an eddy of excitement about some alleged peril
in the mountain path they were to attempt that week.  The danger was
not from rock and avalanche, but from something yet more romantic.
Ethel had been earnestly assured that brigands, the true cut-throats
of the modern legend, still haunted that ridge and held that pass
of the Apennines.

     "They say," she cried, with the awful relish of a schoolgirl,
"that all that country isn't ruled by the King of Italy, but by
the King of Thieves.  Who is the King of Thieves?"

     "A great man," replied Muscari, "worthy to rank with
your own Robin Hood, signorina.  Montano, the King of Thieves,
was first heard of in the mountains some ten years ago, when people
said brigands were extinct.  But his wild authority spread with
the swiftness of a silent revolution.  Men found his fierce proclamations
nailed in every mountain village; his sentinels, gun in hand,
in every mountain ravine.  Six times the Italian Government
tried to dislodge him, and was defeated in six pitched battles
as if by Napoleon."

     "Now that sort of thing," observed the banker weightily,
"would never be allowed in England; perhaps, after all, we had better
choose another route.  But the courier thought it perfectly safe."

     "It is perfectly safe," said the courier contemptuously.
"I have been over it twenty times.  There may have been some old
jailbird called a King in the time of our grandmothers;
but he belongs to history if not to fable.  Brigandage is utterly
stamped out."

     "It can never be utterly stamped out," Muscari answered;
"because armed revolt is a recreation natural to southerners.
Our peasants are like their mountains, rich in grace and green gaiety,
but with the fires beneath.  There is a point of human despair where
the northern poor take to drink--and our own poor take to daggers."

     "A poet is privileged," replied Ezza, with a sneer.
"If Signor Muscari were English be would still be looking
for highwaymen in Wandsworth.  Believe me, there is no more danger
of being captured in Italy than of being scalped in Boston."

     "Then you propose to attempt it?" asked Mr Harrogate, frowning.

     "Oh, it sounds rather dreadful," cried the girl, turning her
glorious eyes on Muscari.  "Do you really think the pass is dangerous?"

     Muscari threw back his black mane.  "I know it is dangerous:"
he said.  "I am crossing it tomorrow."

     The young Harrogate was left behind for a moment emptying a glass of
white wine and lighting a cigarette, as the beauty retired with the banker,
the courier and the poet, distributing peals of silvery satire.
At about the same instant the two priests in the corner rose;
the taller, a white-haired Italian, taking his leave.  The shorter priest
turned and walked towards the banker's son, and the latter was astonished
to realize that though a Roman priest the man was an Englishman.
He vaguely remembered meeting him at the social crushes of some of
his Catholic friends.  But the man spoke before his memories could
collect themselves.

     "Mr Frank Harrogate, I think," he said.  "I have had an introduction,
but I do not mean to presume on it.  The odd thing I have to say
will come far better from a stranger.  Mr Harrogate, I say one word and go:
take care of your sister in her great sorrow."

     Even for Frank's truly fraternal indifference the radiance
and derision of his sister still seemed to sparkle and ring;
he could hear her laughter still from the garden of the hotel,
and he stared at his sombre adviser in puzzledom.

     "Do you mean the brigands?" he asked; and then, remembering
a vague fear of his own, "or can you be thinking of Muscari?"

     "One is never thinking of the real sorrow," said the strange priest.
"One can only be kind when it comes."

     And he passed promptly from the room, leaving the other almost
with his mouth open.

     A day or two afterwards a coach containing the company was
really crawling and staggering up the spurs of the menacing mountain range.
Between Ezza's cheery denial of the danger and Muscari's boisterous
defiance of it, the financial family were firm in their original purpose;
and Muscari made his mountain journey coincide with theirs.
A more surprising feature was the appearance at the coast-town station
of the little priest of the restaurant; he alleged merely
that business led him also to cross the mountains of the midland.
But young Harrogate could not but connect his presence with
the mystical fears and warnings of yesterday.

     The coach was a kind of commodious wagonette, invented by
the modernist talent of the courier, who dominated the expedition
with his scientific activity and breezy wit.  The theory of danger from
thieves was banished from thought and speech; though so far conceded
in formal act that some slight protection was employed.  The courier
and the young banker carried loaded revolvers, and Muscari
(with much boyish gratification) buckled on a kind of cutlass
under his black cloak.

     He had planted his person at a flying leap next to
the lovely Englishwoman; on the other side of her sat the priest,
whose name was Brown and who was fortunately a silent individual;
the courier and the father and son were on the banc behind.
Muscari was in towering spirits, seriously believing in the peril,
and his talk to Ethel might well have made her think him a maniac.
But there was something in the crazy and gorgeous ascent,
amid crags like peaks loaded with woods like orchards, that dragged
her spirit up alone with his into purple preposterous heavens
with wheeling suns.  The white road climbed like a white cat;
it spanned sunless chasms like a tight-rope; it was flung round
far-off headlands like a lasso.

     And yet, however high they went, the desert still blossomed
like the rose.  The fields were burnished in sun and wind
with the colour of kingfisher and parrot and humming-bird,
the hues of a hundred flowering flowers.  There are no lovelier meadows
and woodlands than the English, no nobler crests or chasms than
those of Snowdon and Glencoe.  But Ethel Harrogate had never before
seen the southern parks tilted on the splintered northern peaks;
the gorge of Glencoe laden with the fruits of Kent.  There was nothing here
of that chill and desolation that in Britain one associates with
high and wild scenery.  It was rather like a mosaic palace,
rent with earthquakes; or like a Dutch tulip garden blown to the stars
with dynamite.

     "It's like Kew Gardens on Beachy Head," said Ethel.

     "It is our secret," answered he, "the secret of the volcano;
that is also the secret of the revolution--that a thing can be violent
and yet fruitful."

     "You are rather violent yourself," and she smiled at him.

     "And yet rather fruitless," he admitted; "if I die tonight
I die unmarried and a fool."

     "It is not my fault if you have come," she said after
a difficult silence.

     "It is never your fault," answered Muscari; "it was not your fault
that Troy fell."

     As they spoke they came under overwhelming cliffs that spread
almost like wings above a corner of peculiar peril.  Shocked by the
big shadow on the narrow ledge, the horses stirred doubtfully.
The driver leapt to the earth to hold their heads, and they
became ungovernable.  One horse reared up to his full height--
the titanic and terrifying height of a horse when he becomes a biped.
It was just enough to alter the equilibrium; the whole coach
heeled over like a ship and crashed through the fringe of bushes
over the cliff.  Muscari threw an arm round Ethel, who clung to him,
and shouted aloud.  It was for such moments that he lived.

     At the moment when the gorgeous mountain walls went round
the poet's head like a purple windmill a thing happened which was
superficially even more startling.  The elderly and lethargic banker
sprang erect in the coach and leapt over the precipice before
the tilted vehicle could take him there.  In the first flash
it looked as wild as suicide; but in the second it was as sensible as
a safe investment.  The Yorkshireman had evidently more promptitude,
as well as more sagacity, than Muscari had given him credit for;
for he landed in a lap of land which might have been specially padded
with turf and clover to receive him.  As it happened, indeed,
the whole company were equally lucky, if less dignified in their
form of ejection.  Immediately under this abrupt turn of the road
was a grassy and flowery hollow like a sunken meadow; a sort of
green velvet pocket in the long, green, trailing garments of the hills.
Into this they were all tipped or tumbled with little damage,
save that their smallest baggage and even the contents of their pockets
were scattered in the grass around them.  The wrecked coach still
hung above, entangled in the tough hedge, and the horses plunged
painfully down the slope.  The first to sit up was the little priest,
who scratched his head with a face of foolish wonder.  Frank Harrogate
heard him say to himself: "Now why on earth have we fallen just here?"

     He blinked at the litter around him, and recovered his own
very clumsy umbrella.  Beyond it lay the broad sombrero fallen from
the head of Muscari, and beside it a sealed business letter which,
after a glance at the address, he returned to the elder Harrogate.
On the other side of him the grass partly hid Miss Ethel's sunshade,
and just beyond it lay a curious little glass bottle hardly two inches long.
The priest picked it up; in a quick, unobtrusive manner he uncorked
and sniffed it, and his heavy face turned the colour of clay.

     "Heaven deliver us!" he muttered; "it can't be hers!
Has her sorrow come on her already?" He slipped it into his own
waistcoat pocket.  "I think I'm justified," he said, "till I know
a little more."

     He gazed painfully at the girl, at that moment being raised out of
the flowers by Muscari, who was saying:  "We have fallen into heaven;
it is a sign.  Mortals climb up and they fall down; but it is only
gods and goddesses who can fall upwards."

     And indeed she rose out of the sea of colours so beautiful and
happy a vision that the priest felt his suspicion shaken and shifted.
"After all," he thought, "perhaps the poison isn't hers; perhaps it's
one of Muscari's melodramatic tricks."

     Muscari set the lady lightly on her feet, made her an absurdly
theatrical bow, and then, drawing his cutlass, hacked hard at
the taut reins of the horses, so that they scrambled to their feet
and stood in the grass trembling.  When he had done so,
a most remarkable thing occurred.  A very quiet man, very poorly dressed
and extremely sunburnt, came out of the bushes and took hold of
the horses' heads.  He had a queer-shaped knife, very broad and crooked,
buckled on his belt; there was nothing else remarkable about him,
except his sudden and silent appearance.  The poet asked him who he was,
and he did not answer.

     Looking around him at the confused and startled group in the hollow,
Muscari then perceived that another tanned and tattered man,
with a short gun under his arm, was looking at them from
the ledge just below, leaning his elbows on the edge of the turf.
Then he looked up at the road from which they had fallen and saw,
looking down on them, the muzzles of four other carbines and
four other brown faces with bright but quite motionless eyes.

     "The brigands!" cried Muscari, with a kind of monstrous gaiety.
"This was a trap.  Ezza, if you will oblige me by shooting the
coachman first, we can cut our way out yet.  There are only six of them."

     "The coachman," said Ezza, who was standing grimly with his hands
in his pockets, "happens to be a servant of Mr Harrogate's."

     "Then shoot him all the more," cried the poet impatiently;
"he was bribed to upset his master.  Then put the lady in the middle,
and we will break the line up there--with a rush."

     And, wading in wild grass and flowers, he advanced fearlessly
on the four carbines; but finding that no one followed except
young Harrogate, he turned, brandishing his cutlass to wave the others on.
He beheld the courier still standing slightly astride in the centre of
the grassy ring, his hands in his pockets; and his lean, ironical
Italian face seemed to grow longer and longer in the evening light.

     "You thought, Muscari, I was the failure among our schoolfellows,"
he said, "and you thought you were the success.  But I have succeeded
more than you and fill a bigger place in history.  I have been
acting epics while you have been writing them."

     "Come on, I tell you!" thundered Muscari from above.
"Will you stand there talking nonsense about yourself with a woman
to save and three strong men to help you?  What do you call yourself?"

     "I call myself Montano," cried the strange courier in a voice
equally loud and full.  "I am the King of Thieves, and I welcome you all
to my summer palace."

     And even as he spoke five more silent men with weapons ready
came out of the bushes, and looked towards him for their orders.
One of them held a large paper in his hand.

     "This pretty little nest where we are all picnicking,"
went on the courier-brigand, with the same easy yet sinister smile,
"is, together with some caves underneath it, known by the name of
the Paradise of Thieves.  It is my principal stronghold on these hills;
for (as you have doubtless noticed) the eyrie is invisible both from
the road above and from the valley below.  It is something better
than impregnable; it is unnoticeable.  Here I mostly live, and here
I shall certainly die, if the gendarmes ever track me here.
I am not the kind of criminal that `reserves his defence,'
but the better kind that reserves his last bullet."

     All were staring at him thunderstruck and still, except Father Brown,
who heaved a huge sigh as of relief and fingered the little phial
in his pocket.  "Thank God!" he muttered; "that's much more probable.
The poison belongs to this robber-chief, of course.  He carries it
so that he may never be captured, like Cato."

     The King of Thieves was, however, continuing his address with
the same kind of dangerous politeness.  "It only remains for me,"
he said, "to explain to my guests the social conditions upon which
I have the pleasure of entertaining them.  I need not expound
the quaint old ritual of ransom, which it is incumbent upon me
to keep up; and even this only applies to a part of the company.
The Reverend Father Brown and the celebrated Signor Muscari
I shall release tomorrow at dawn and escort to my outposts.
Poets and priests, if you will pardon my simplicity of speech,
never have any money.  And so (since it is impossible to get anything
out of them), let us, seize the opportunity to show our admiration for
classic literature and our reverence for Holy Church."

     He paused with an unpleasing smile; and Father Brown
blinked repeatedly at him, and seemed suddenly to be listening
with great attention.  The brigand captain took the large paper from
the attendant brigand and, glancing over it, continued:
"My other intentions are clearly set forth in this public document,
which I will hand round in a moment; and which after that will be
posted on a tree by every village in the valley, and every cross-road
in the hills.  I will not weary you with the verbalism, since you
will be able to check it; the substance of my proclamation is this:
I announce first that I have captured the English millionaire,
the colossus of finance, Mr Samuel Harrogate.  I next announce
that I have found on his person notes and bonds for two thousand pounds,
which he has given up to me.  Now since it would be really immoral
to announce such a thing to a credulous public if it had not occurred,
I suggest it should occur without further delay.  I suggest that
Mr Harrogate senior should now give me the two thousand pounds
in his pocket."

     The banker looked at him under lowering brows, red-faced and sulky,
but seemingly cowed.  That leap from the failing carriage seemed
to have used up his last virility.  He had held back in a hang-dog style
when his son and Muscari had made a bold movement to break out of
the brigand trap.  And now his red and trembling hand went reluctantly
to his breast-pocket, and passed a bundle of papers and envelopes
to the brigand.

     "Excellent!" cried that outlaw gaily; "so far we are all cosy.
I resume the points of my proclamation, so soon to be published
to all Italy.  The third item is that of ransom.  I am asking
from the friends of the Harrogate family a ransom of three thousand pounds,
which I am sure is almost insulting to that family in its moderate estimate
of their importance.  Who would not pay triple this sum for another day's
association with such a domestic circle?  I will not conceal from you
that the document ends with certain legal phrases about
the unpleasant things that may happen if the money is not paid;
but meanwhile, ladies and gentlemen, let me assure you that
I am comfortably off here for accommodation, wine and cigars,
and bid you for the present a sportsman-like welcome to the luxuries
of the Paradise of Thieves."

     All the time that he had been speaking, the dubious-looking men
with carbines and dirty slouch hats had been gathering silently
in such preponderating numbers that even Muscari was compelled
to recognize his sally with the sword as hopeless.  He glanced around him;
but the girl had already gone over to soothe and comfort her father,
for her natural affection for his person was as strong or stronger than
her somewhat snobbish pride in his success.  Muscari, with the illogicality
of a lover, admired this filial devotion, and yet was irritated by it.
He slapped his sword back in the scabbard and went and flung himself
somewhat sulkily on one of the green banks.  The priest sat down
within a yard or two, and Muscari turned his aquiline nose on him
in an instantaneous irritation.

     "Well," said the poet tartly, "do people still think me too romantic?
Are there, I wonder, any brigands left in the mountains?"

     "There may be," said Father Brown agnostically.

     "What do you mean?" asked the other sharply.

     "I mean I am puzzled," replied the priest.  "I am puzzled about
Ezza or Montano, or whatever his name is.  He seems to me much more
inexplicable as a brigand even than he was as a courier."

     "But in what way?" persisted his companion.  "Santa Maria!
I should have thought the brigand was plain enough."

     "I find three curious difficulties," said the priest in a quiet voice.
"I should like to have your opinion on them.  First of all
I must tell you I was lunching in that restaurant at the seaside.
As four of you left the room, you and Miss Harrogate went ahead,
talking and laughing; the banker and the courier came behind,
speaking sparely and rather low.  But I could not help hearing Ezza
say these words--`Well, let her have a little fun; you know the blow
may smash her any minute.'  Mr Harrogate answered nothing;
so the words must have had some meaning.  On the impulse of the moment
I warned her brother that she might be in peril; I said nothing
of its nature, for I did not know.  But if it meant this capture
in the hills, the thing is nonsense.  Why should the brigand-courier
warn his patron, even by a hint, when it was his whole purpose to lure him
into the mountain-mousetrap?  It could not have meant that.
But if not, what is this disaster, known both to courier and banker,
which hangs over Miss Harrogate's head?"

     "Disaster to Miss Harrogate!" ejaculated the poet, sitting up
with some ferocity.  "Explain yourself; go on."

     "All my riddles, however, revolve round our bandit chief,"
resumed the priest reflectively.  "And here is the second of them.
Why did he put so prominently in his demand for ransom the fact that
he had taken two thousand pounds from his victim on the spot?
It had no faintest tendency to evoke the ransom.  Quite the other way,
in fact.  Harrogate's friends would be far likelier to fear for his fate
if they thought the thieves were poor and desperate.  Yet the spoliation
on the spot was emphasized and even put first in the demand.
Why should Ezza Montano want so specially to tell all Europe that
he had picked the pocket before he levied the blackmail?"

     "I cannot imagine," said Muscari, rubbing up his black hair
for once with an unaffected gesture.  "You may think you enlighten me,
but you are leading me deeper in the dark.  What may be the third
objection to the King of the Thieves?"  "The third objection,"
said Father Brown, still in meditation, "is this bank we are sitting on.
Why does our brigand-courier call this his chief fortress and
the Paradise of Thieves?  It is certainly a soft spot to fall on
and a sweet spot to look at.  It is also quite true, as he says,
that it is invisible from valley and peak, and is therefore a hiding-place.
But it is not a fortress.  It never could be a fortress.
I think it would be the worst fortress in the world.  For it is actually
commanded from above by the common high-road across the mountains--
the very place where the police would most probably pass.
Why, five shabby short guns held us helpless here about half an hour ago.
The quarter of a company of any kind of soldiers could have blown us
over the precipice.  Whatever is the meaning of this odd little nook
of grass and flowers, it is not an entrenched position.
It is something else; it has some other strange sort of importance;
some value that I do not understand.  It is more like an accidental theatre
or a natural green-room; it is like the scene for some romantic comedy;
it is like...."

     As the little priest's words lengthened and lost themselves
in a dull and dreamy sincerity, Muscari, whose animal senses were alert
and impatient, heard a new noise in the mountains.  Even for him
the sound was as yet very small and faint; but he could have sworn
the evening breeze bore with it something like the pulsation of
horses' hoofs and a distant hallooing.

     At the same moment, and long before the vibration had touched
the less-experienced English ears, Montano the brigand ran up
the bank above them and stood in the broken hedge, steadying himself
against a tree and peering down the road.  He was a strange figure
as he stood there, for he had assumed a flapped fantastic hat and
swinging baldric and cutlass in his capacity of bandit king,
but the bright prosaic tweed of the courier showed through in patches
all over him.

     The next moment he turned his olive, sneering face and made
a movement with his hand.  The brigands scattered at the signal,
not in confusion, but in what was evidently a kind of guerrilla discipline.
Instead of occupying the road along the ridge, they sprinkled themselves
along the side of it behind the trees and the hedge, as if watching unseen
for an enemy.  The noise beyond grew stronger, beginning to shake
the mountain road, and a voice could be clearly heard calling out orders.
The brigands swayed and huddled, cursing and whispering,
and the evening air was full of little metallic noises as they
cocked their pistols, or loosened their knives, or trailed their scabbards
over the stones.  Then the noises from both quarters seemed to meet
on the road above; branches broke, horses neighed, men cried out.

     "A rescue!" cried Muscari, springing to his feet and waving his hat;
"the gendarmes are on them!  Now for freedom and a blow for it!
Now to be rebels against robbers!  Come, don't let us leave everything
to the police; that is so dreadfully modern.  Fall on the rear
of these ruffians.  The gendarmes are rescuing us; come, friends,
let us rescue the gendarmes!"

     And throwing his hat over the trees, he drew his cutlass once more
and began to escalade the slope up to the road.  Frank Harrogate
jumped up and ran across to help him, revolver in hand, but was astounded
to hear himself imperatively recalled by the raucous voice of his father,
who seemed to be in great agitation.

     "I won't have it," said the banker in a choking voice;
"I command you not to interfere."

     "But, father," said Frank very warmly, "an Italian gentleman has
led the way.  You wouldn't have it said that the English hung back."

     "It is useless," said the older man, who was trembling violently,
"it is useless.  We must submit to our lot."

     Father Brown looked at the banker; then he put his hand instinctively
as if on his heart, but really on the little bottle of poison;
and a great light came into his face like the light of the revelation
of death.

     Muscari meanwhile, without waiting for support, had crested the bank
up to the road, and struck the brigand king heavily on the shoulder,
causing him to stagger and swing round.  Montano also had
his cutlass unsheathed, and Muscari, without further speech,
sent a slash at his head which he was compelled to catch and parry.
But even as the two short blades crossed and clashed the King of Thieves
deliberately dropped his point and laughed.

     "What's the good, old man?" he said in spirited Italian slang;
"this damned farce will soon be over."

     "What do you mean, you shuffler?" panted the fire-eating poet.
"Is your courage a sham as well as your honesty?"

     "Everything about me is a sham," responded the ex-courier
in complete good humour.  "I am an actor; and if I ever had
a private character, I have forgotten it.  I am no more a genuine brigand
than I am a genuine courier.  I am only a bundle of masks,
and you can't fight a duel with that."  And he laughed with boyish pleasure
and fell into his old straddling attitude, with his back to the skirmish
up the road.

     Darkness was deepening under the mountain walls, and it was not easy
to discern much of the progress of the struggle, save that tall men
were pushing their horses' muzzles through a clinging crowd of brigands,
who seemed more inclined to harass and hustle the invaders
than to kill them.  It was more like a town crowd preventing
the passage of the police than anything the poet had ever pictured
as the last stand of doomed and outlawed men of blood.  Just as he was
rolling his eyes in bewilderment he felt a touch on his elbow,
and found the odd little priest standing there like a small Noah
with a large hat, and requesting the favour of a word or two.

     "Signor Muscari," said the cleric, "in this queer crisis
personalities may be pardoned.  I may tell you without offence
of a way in which you will do more good than by helping the gendarmes,
who are bound to break through in any case.  You will permit me
the impertinent intimacy, but do you care about that girl?
Care enough to marry her and make her a good husband, I mean?"

     "Yes," said the poet quite simply.

     "Does she care about you?"

     "I think so," was the equally grave reply.

     "Then go over there and offer yourself," said the priest:
"offer her everything you can; offer her heaven and earth
if you've got them.  The time is short."

     "Why?" asked the astonished man of letters.

     "Because," said Father Brown, "her Doom is coming up the road."

     "Nothing is coming up the road," argued Muscari, "except the rescue."

     "Well, you go over there," said his adviser, "and be ready
to rescue her from the rescue."

     Almost as he spoke the hedges were broken all along the ridge
by a rush of the escaping brigands.  They dived into bushes
and thick grass like defeated men pursued; and the great cocked hats
of the mounted gendarmerie were seen passing along above the broken hedge.
Another order was given; there was a noise of dismounting,
and a tall officer with cocked hat, a grey imperial, and a paper in his hand
appeared in the gap that was the gate of the Paradise of Thieves.
There was a momentary silence, broken in an extraordinary way by the banker,
who cried out in a hoarse and strangled voice: "Robbed!  I've been robbed!"

     "Why, that was hours ago," cried his son in astonishment:
"when you were robbed of two thousand pounds."

     "Not of two thousand pounds," said the financier, with an abrupt
and terrible composure, "only of a small bottle."

     The policeman with the grey imperial was striding across
the green hollow.  Encountering the King of the Thieves in his path,
he clapped him on the shoulder with something between a caress
and a buffet and gave him a push that sent him staggering away.
"You'll get into trouble, too," he said, "if you play these tricks."

     Again to Muscari's artistic eye it seemed scarcely like
the capture of a great outlaw at bay.  Passing on, the policeman halted
before the Harrogate group and said:  "Samuel Harrogate, I arrest you
in the name of the law for embezzlement of the funds of the Hull and
Huddersfield Bank."

     The great banker nodded with an odd air of business assent,
seemed to reflect a moment, and before they could interpose took
a half turn and a step that brought him to the edge of the outer
mountain wall.  Then, flinging up his hands, he leapt exactly as he leapt
out of the coach.  But this time he did not fall into a little meadow
just beneath; he fell a thousand feet below, to become a wreck of bones
in the valley.

     The anger of the Italian policeman, which he expressed volubly
to Father Brown, was largely mixed with admiration.  "It was like him
to escape us at last," he said.  "He was a great brigand if you like.
This last trick of his I believe to be absolutely unprecedented.
He fled with the company's money to Italy, and actually got himself
captured by sham brigands in his own pay, so as to explain both the
disappearance of the money and the disappearance of himself.
That demand for ransom was really taken seriously by most of the police.
But for years he's been doing things as good as that, quite as good
as that.  He will be a serious loss to his family."

     Muscari was leading away the unhappy daughter, who held hard to him,
as she did for many a year after.  But even in that tragic wreck
he could not help having a smile and a hand of half-mocking friendship
for the indefensible Ezza Montano.  "And where are you going next?"
he asked him over his shoulder.

     "Birmingham," answered the actor, puffing a cigarette.
"Didn't I tell you I was a Futurist?  I really do believe in those things
if I believe in anything.  Change, bustle and new things every morning.
I am going to Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds, Hull, Huddersfield,
Glasgow, Chicago--in short, to enlightened, energetic, civilized society!"

     "In short," said Muscari, "to the real Paradise of Thieves."



III. The Duel of Dr Hirsch


M. MAURICE BRUN and M. Armand Armagnac were crossing the sunlit
Champs Elysee with a kind of vivacious respectability.
They were both short, brisk and bold.  They both had black beards
that did not seem to belong to their faces, after the strange French fashion
which makes real hair look like artificial.  M. Brun had
a dark wedge of beard apparently affixed under his lower lip.
M. Armagnac, by way of a change, had two beards; one sticking out
from each corner of his emphatic chin.  They were both young.
They were both atheists, with a depressing fixity of outlook
but great mobility of exposition.  They were both pupils of
the great Dr Hirsch, scientist, publicist and moralist.

     M. Brun had become prominent by his proposal that the common
expression "Adieu" should be obliterated from all the French classics,
and a slight fine imposed for its use in private life.  "Then," he said,
"the very name of your imagined God will have echoed for the last time
in the ear of man."  M. Armagnac specialized rather in a resistance
to militarism, and wished the chorus of the Marseillaise altered from
"Aux armes, citoyens" to "Aux greves, citoyens".  But his antimilitarism
was of a peculiar and Gallic sort.  An eminent and very wealthy
English Quaker, who had come to see him to arrange for the disarmament
of the whole planet, was rather distressed by Armagnac's proposal
that (by way of beginning) the soldiers should shoot their officers.

     And indeed it was in this regard that the two men differed most
from their leader and father in philosophy.  Dr Hirsch,
though born in France and covered with the most triumphant favours
of French education, was temperamentally of another type--mild, dreamy,
humane; and, despite his sceptical system, not devoid of transcendentalism.
He was, in short, more like a German than a Frenchman; and much as they
admired him, something in the subconsciousness of these Gauls was
irritated at his pleading for peace in so peaceful a manner.
To their party throughout Europe, however, Paul Hirsch was
a saint of science.  His large and daring cosmic theories
advertised his austere life and innocent, if somewhat frigid, morality;
he held something of the position of Darwin doubled with the position
of Tolstoy.  But he was neither an anarchist nor an antipatriot;
his views on disarmament were moderate and evolutionary--
the Republican Government put considerable confidence in him
as to various chemical improvements.  He had lately even discovered
a noiseless explosive, the secret of which the Government was
carefully guarding.

     His house stood in a handsome street near the Elysee--
a street which in that strong summer seemed almost as full of foliage
as the park itself; a row of chestnuts shattered the sunshine,
interrupted only in one place where a large cafe ran out into the street.
Almost opposite to this were the white and green blinds of
the great scientist's house, an iron balcony, also painted green,
running along in front of the first-floor windows.  Beneath this was
the entrance into a kind of court, gay with shrubs and tiles,
into which the two Frenchmen passed in animated talk.

     The door was opened to them by the doctor's old servant, Simon,
who might very well have passed for a doctor himself, having a strict
suit of black, spectacles, grey hair, and a confidential manner.
In fact, he was a far more presentable man of science than his master,
Dr Hirsch, who was a forked radish of a fellow, with just enough
bulb of a head to make his body insignificant.  With all the gravity
of a great physician handling a prescription, Simon handed a letter
to M. Armagnac.  That gentleman ripped it up with a racial impatience,
and rapidly read the following:

     I cannot come down to speak to you.  There is a man in this house
whom I refuse to meet.  He is a Chauvinist officer, Dubosc.
He is sitting on the stairs.  He has been kicking the furniture about
in all the other rooms; I have locked myself in my study,
opposite that cafe.  If you love me, go over to the cafe and wait
at one of the tables outside.  I will try to send him over to you.
I want you to answer him and deal with him.  I cannot meet him myself.
I cannot: I will not.

     There is going to be another Dreyfus case.

                                             P. HIRSCH



     M. Armagnac looked at M. Brun.  M. Brun borrowed the letter,
read it, and looked at M. Armagnac.  Then both betook themselves briskly
to one of the little tables under the chestnuts opposite,
where they procured two tall glasses of horrible green absinthe,
which they could drink apparently in any weather and at any time.
Otherwise the cafe seemed empty, except for one soldier drinking coffee
at one table, and at another a large man drinking a small syrup and
a priest drinking nothing.

     Maurice Brun cleared his throat and said:  "Of course we must help
the master in every way, but--"

     There was an abrupt silence, and Armagnac said:  "He may have
excellent reasons for not meeting the man himself, but--"

     Before either could complete a sentence, it was evident that
the invader had been expelled from the house opposite.  The shrubs under
the archway swayed and burst apart, as that unwelcome guest was
shot out of them like a cannon-ball.

     He was a sturdy figure in a small and tilted Tyrolean felt hat,
a figure that had indeed something generally Tyrolean about it.
The man's shoulders were big and broad, but his legs were neat and active
in knee-breeches and knitted stockings.  His face was brown like a nut;
he had very bright and restless brown eyes; his dark hair was brushed back
stiffly in front and cropped close behind, outlining a square and
powerful skull; and he had a huge black moustache like the horns of a bison.
Such a substantial head is generally based on a bull neck; but this was
hidden by a big coloured scarf, swathed round up the man's ears
and falling in front inside his jacket like a sort of fancy waistcoat.
It was a scarf of strong dead colours, dark red and old gold and purple,
probably of Oriental fabrication.  Altogether the man had something
a shade barbaric about him; more like a Hungarian squire than
an ordinary French officer.  His French, however, was obviously
that of a native; and his French patriotism was so impulsive
as to be slightly absurd.  His first act when he burst out of the archway
was to call in a clarion voice down the street:  "Are there any
Frenchmen here?" as if he were calling for Christians in Mecca.

     Armagnac and Brun instantly stood up; but they were too late.
Men were already running from the street corners; there was a small
but ever-clustering crowd.  With the prompt French instinct for
the politics of the street, the man with the black moustache had already
run across to a corner of the cafe, sprung on one of the tables,
and seizing a branch of chestnut to steady himself, shouted
as Camille Desmoulins once shouted when he scattered the oak-leaves
among the populace.

     "Frenchmen!" he volleyed; "I cannot speak!  God help me, that is why
I am speaking!  The fellows in their filthy parliaments who learn
to speak also learn to be silent--silent as that spy cowering
in the house opposite!  Silent as he is when I beat on his bedroom door!
Silent as he is now, though he hears my voice across this street
and shakes where he sits!  Oh, they can be silent eloquently--
the politicians!  But the time has come when we that cannot speak
must speak.  You are betrayed to the Prussians.  Betrayed at this moment.
Betrayed by that man.  I am Jules Dubosc, Colonel of Artillery, Belfort.
We caught a German spy in the Vosges yesterday, and a paper was found
on him--a paper I hold in my hand.  Oh, they tried to hush it up;
but I took it direct to the man who wrote it--the man in that house!
It is in his hand.  It is signed with his initials.  It is a direction
for finding the secret of this new Noiseless Powder.  Hirsch invented it;
Hirsch wrote this note about it.  This note is in German, and was found
in a German's pocket.  `Tell the man the formula for powder is in
grey envelope in first drawer to the left of Secretary's desk,
War Office, in red ink.  He must be careful.  P.H.'"

     He rattled short sentences like a quick-firing gun, but he was plainly
the sort of man who is either mad or right.  The mass of the crowd
was Nationalist, and already in threatening uproar; and a minority
of equally angry Intellectuals, led by Armagnac and Brun, only made
the majority more militant.

     "If this is a military secret," shouted Brun, "why do you yell
about it in the street?"

     "I will tell you why I do!" roared Dubosc above the roaring crowd.
"I went to this man in straight and civil style.  If he had any explanation
it could have been given in complete confidence.  He refuses to explain.
He refers me to two strangers in a cafe as to two flunkeys.
He has thrown me out of the house, but I am going back into it,
with the people of Paris behind me!"

     A shout seemed to shake the very facade of mansions and
two stones flew, one breaking a window above the balcony.
The indignant Colonel plunged once more under the archway and was heard
crying and thundering inside.  Every instant the human sea grew wider
and wider; it surged up against the rails and steps of the traitor's house;
it was already certain that the place would be burst into like
the Bastille, when the broken french window opened and Dr Hirsch came out
on the balcony.  For an instant the fury half turned to laughter;
for he was an absurd figure in such a scene.  His long bare neck and
sloping shoulders were the shape of a champagne bottle, but that was
the only festive thing about him.  His coat hung on him as on a peg;
he wore his carrot-coloured hair long and weedy; his cheeks and chin
were fully fringed with one of those irritating beards that begin
far from the mouth.  He was very pale, and he wore blue spectacles.

     Livid as he was, he spoke with a sort of prim decision,
so that the mob fell silent in the middle of his third sentence.

     "...only two things to say to you now.  The first is to my foes,
the second to my friends.  To my foes I say:  It is true I will not
meet M. Dubosc, though he is storming outside this very room.
It is true I have asked two other men to confront him for me.
And I will tell you why!  Because I will not and must not see him--
because it would be against all rules of dignity and honour to see him.
Before I am triumphantly cleared before a court, there is
another arbitration this gentleman owes me as a gentleman,
and in referring him to my seconds I am strictly--"

     Armagnac and Brun were waving their hats wildly, and even
the Doctor's enemies roared applause at this unexpected defiance.
Once more a few sentences were inaudible, but they could hear him say:
"To my friends--I myself should always prefer weapons purely intellectual,
and to these an evolved humanity will certainly confine itself.
But our own most precious truth is the fundamental force of matter
and heredity.  My books are successful; my theories are unrefuted;
but I suffer in politics from a prejudice almost physical in the French.
I cannot speak like Clemenceau and Deroulede, for their words are like
echoes of their pistols.  The French ask for a duellist as the English
ask for a sportsman.  Well, I give my proofs:  I will pay
this barbaric bribe, and then go back to reason for the rest of my life."

     Two men were instantly found in the crowd itself to offer
their services to Colonel Dubosc, who came out presently, satisfied.
One was the common soldier with the coffee, who said simply:
"I will act for you, sir.  I am the Duc de Valognes."  The other was
the big man, whom his friend the priest sought at first to dissuade;
and then walked away alone.

     In the early evening a light dinner was spread at the back of
the Cafe Charlemagne.  Though unroofed by any glass or gilt plaster,
the guests were nearly all under a delicate and irregular roof of leaves;
for the ornamental trees stood so thick around and among the tables
as to give something of the dimness and the dazzle of a small orchard.
At one of the central tables a very stumpy little priest sat
in complete solitude, and applied himself to a pile of whitebait
with the gravest sort of enjoyment.  His daily living being very plain,
he had a peculiar taste for sudden and isolated luxuries; he was
an abstemious epicure.  He did not lift his eyes from his plate,
round which red pepper, lemons, brown bread and butter, etc.,
were rigidly ranked, until a tall shadow fell across the table,
and his friend Flambeau sat down opposite.  Flambeau was gloomy.

     "I'm afraid I must chuck this business," said he heavily.
"I'm all on the side of the French soldiers like Dubosc,
and I'm all against the French atheists like Hirsch; but it seems to me
in this case we've made a mistake.  The Duke and I thought it as well
to investigate the charge, and I must say I'm glad we did."

     "Is the paper a forgery, then?" asked the priest

     "That's just the odd thing," replied Flambeau.  "It's exactly like
Hirsch's writing, and nobody can point out any mistake in it.
But it wasn't written by Hirsch.  If he's a French patriot
he didn't write it, because it gives information to Germany.
And if he's a German spy he didn't write it, well--because it doesn't
give information to Germany."

     "You mean the information is wrong?" asked Father Brown.

     "Wrong," replied the other, "and wrong exactly where Dr Hirsch
would have been right--about the hiding-place of his own secret formula
in his own official department.  By favour of Hirsch and the authorities,
the Duke and I have actually been allowed to inspect the secret drawer
at the War Office where the Hirsch formula is kept.  We are the only people
who have ever known it, except the inventor himself and the Minister
for War; but the Minister permitted it to save Hirsch from fighting.
After that we really can't support Dubosc if his revelation
is a mare's nest."

     "And it is?" asked Father Brown.

     "It is," said his friend gloomily.  "It is a clumsy forgery
by somebody who knew nothing of the real hiding-place.  It says the paper
is in the cupboard on the right of the Secretary's desk.  As a fact
the cupboard with the secret drawer is some way to the left of the desk.
It says the grey envelope contains a long document written in red ink.
It isn't written in red ink, but in ordinary black ink.
It's manifestly absurd to say that Hirsch can have made a mistake
about a paper that nobody knew of but himself; or can have tried
to help a foreign thief by telling him to fumble in the wrong drawer.
I think we must chuck it up and apologize to old Carrots."

     Father Brown seemed to cogitate; he lifted a little whitebait
on his fork.  "You are sure the grey envelope was in the left cupboard?"
he asked.

     "Positive," replied Flambeau.  "The grey envelope--
it was a white envelope really--was--"

     Father Brown put down the small silver fish and the fork and
stared across at his companion.  "What?" he asked, in an altered voice.

     "Well, what?" repeated Flambeau, eating heartily.

     "It was not grey," said the priest.  "Flambeau, you frighten me."

     "What the deuce are you frightened of?"

     "I'm frightened of a white envelope," said the other seriously,
"If it had only just been grey!  Hang it all, it might as well
have been grey.  But if it was white, the whole business is black.
The Doctor has been dabbling in some of the old brimstone after all."

     "But I tell you he couldn't have written such a note!"
cried Flambeau.  "The note is utterly wrong about the facts.
And innocent or guilty, Dr Hirsch knew all about the facts."

     "The man who wrote that note knew all about the facts,"
said his clerical companion soberly.  "He could never have
got 'em so wrong without knowing about 'em.  You have to know
an awful lot to be wrong on every subject--like the devil."

     "Do you mean--?"

     "I mean a man telling lies on chance would have told some of the truth,"
said his friend firmly.  "Suppose someone sent you to find a house
with a green door and a blue blind, with a front garden but no back garden,
with a dog but no cat, and where they drank coffee but not tea.
You would say if you found no such house that it was all made up.
But I say no.  I say if you found a house where the door was blue and
the blind green, where there was a back garden and no front garden,
where cats were common and dogs instantly shot, where tea was drunk
in quarts and coffee forbidden--then you would know you had
found the house.  The man must have known that particular house
to be so accurately inaccurate."

     "But what could it mean?" demanded the diner opposite.

     "I can't conceive," said Brown; "I don't understand this Hirsch
affair at all.  As long as it was only the left drawer instead of
the right, and red ink instead of black, I thought it must be the
chance blunders of a forger, as you say.  But three is a mystical number;
it finishes things.  It finishes this.  That the direction about
the drawer, the colour of ink, the colour of envelope, should none of
them be right by accident, that can't be a coincidence.  It wasn't."

     "What was it, then?  Treason?" asked Flambeau, resuming his dinner.

     "I don't know that either," answered Brown, with a face
of blank bewilderment.  "The only thing I can think of....
Well, I never understood that Dreyfus case.  I can always grasp
moral evidence easier than the other sorts.  I go by a man's eyes and voice,
don't you know, and whether his family seems happy, and by what
subjects he chooses--and avoids.  Well, I was puzzled in the Dreyfus case.
Not by the horrible things imputed both ways; I know (though it's not
modern to say so) that human nature in the highest places is still capable
of being Cenci or Borgia.  No--, what puzzled me was the sincerity
of both parties.  I don't mean the political parties; the rank and file
are always roughly honest, and often duped.  I mean the persons
of the play.  I mean the conspirators, if they were conspirators.
I mean the traitor, if he was a traitor.  I mean the men who must have
known the truth.  Now Dreyfus went on like a man who knew he was
a wronged man.  And yet the French statesmen and soldiers went on
as if they knew he wasn't a wronged man but simply a wrong 'un.
I don't mean they behaved well; I mean they behaved as if they were sure.
I can't describe these things; I know what I mean."

     "I wish I did," said his friend.  "And what has it to do
with old Hirsch?"

     "Suppose a person in a position of trust," went on the priest,
"began to give the enemy information because it was false information.
Suppose he even thought he was saving his country by misleading the foreigner.
Suppose this brought him into spy circles, and little loans were made to him,
and little ties tied on to him.  Suppose he kept up his contradictory
position in a confused way by never telling the foreign spies the truth,
but letting it more and more be guessed.  The better part of him
(what was left of it) would still say:  `I have not helped the enemy;
I said it was the left drawer.'  The meaner part of him would already
be saying:  `But they may have the sense to see that means the right.'
I think it is psychologically possible--in an enlightened age, you know."

     "It may be psychologically possible," answered Flambeau,
"and it certainly would explain Dreyfus being certain he was wronged
and his judges being sure he was guilty.  But it won't wash historically,
because Dreyfus's document (if it was his document) was literally correct."

     "I wasn't thinking of Dreyfus," said Father Brown.

     Silence had sunk around them with the emptying of the tables;
it was already late, though the sunlight still clung to everything,
as if accidentally entangled in the trees.  In the stillness Flambeau
shifted his seat sharply--making an isolated and echoing noise--
and threw his elbow over the angle of it.  "Well," he said, rather harshly,
"if Hirsch is not better than a timid treason-monger..."

     "You mustn't be too hard on them," said Father Brown gently.
"It's not entirely their fault; but they have no instincts.
I mean those things that make a woman refuse to dance with a man
or a man to touch an investment.  They've been taught that
it's all a matter of degree."

     "Anyhow," cried Flambeau impatiently, "he's not a patch
on my principal; and I shall go through with it.  Old Dubosc may be
a bit mad, but he's a sort of patriot after all."

     Father Brown continued to consume whitebait.

     Something in the stolid way he did so caused Flambeau's
fierce black eyes to ramble over his companion afresh.  "What's the matter
with you?" Flambeau demanded.  "Dubosc's all right in that way.
You don't doubt him?"

     "My friend," said the small priest, laying down his knife and fork
in a kind of cold despair, "I doubt everything.  Everything, I mean,
that has happened today.  I doubt the whole story, though it has been
acted before my face.  I doubt every sight that my eyes have seen
since morning.  There is something in this business quite different
from the ordinary police mystery where one man is more or less lying
and the other man more or less telling the truth.  Here both men....
Well!  I've told you the only theory I can think of that could
satisfy anybody.  It doesn't satisfy me."

     "Nor me either," replied Flambeau frowning, while the other
went on eating fish with an air of entire resignation.  "If all you
can suggest is that notion of a message conveyed by contraries,
I call it uncommonly clever, but...well, what would you call it?"

     "I should call it thin," said the priest promptly.
"I should call it uncommonly thin.  But that's the queer thing
about the whole business.  The lie is like a schoolboy's.
There are only three versions, Dubosc's and Hirsch's and that fancy of mine.
Either that note was written by a French officer to ruin a French official;
or it was written by the French official to help German officers;
or it was written by the French official to mislead German officers.
Very well.  You'd expect a secret paper passing between such people,
officials or officers, to look quite different from that.
You'd expect, probably a cipher, certainly abbreviations;
most certainly scientific and strictly professional terms.
But this thing's elaborately simple, like a penny dreadful:
`In the purple grotto you will find the golden casket.' It looks as if...
as if it were meant to be seen through at once."

     Almost before they could take it in a short figure in French uniform
had walked up to their table like the wind, and sat down
with a sort of thump.

     "I have extraordinary news," said the Duc de Valognes.
"I have just come from this Colonel of ours.  He is packing up
to leave the country, and he asks us to make his excuses sur le terrain."

     "What?" cried Flambeau, with an incredulity quite frightful--
"apologize?"

     "Yes," said the Duke gruffly; "then and there--before everybody--
when the swords are drawn.  And you and I have to do it while
he is leaving the country."

     "But what can this mean?" cried Flambeau.  "He can't be afraid of
that little Hirsch!  Confound it!" he cried, in a kind of rational rage;
"nobody could be afraid of Hirsch!"

     "I believe it's some plot!" snapped Valognes--"some plot of
the Jews and Freemasons.  It's meant to work up glory for Hirsch..."

     The face of Father Brown was commonplace, but curiously contented;
it could shine with ignorance as well as with knowledge.
But there was always one flash when the foolish mask fell,
and the wise mask fitted itself in its place; and Flambeau,
who knew his friend, knew that his friend had suddenly understood.
Brown said nothing, but finished his plate of fish.

     "Where did you last see our precious Colonel?" asked Flambeau,
irritably.

     "He's round at the Hotel Saint Louis by the Elysee,
where we drove with him.  He's packing up, I tell you."

     "Will he be there still, do you think?" asked Flambeau,
frowning at the table.

     "I don't think he can get away yet," replied the Duke;
"he's packing to go a long journey..."

     "No," said Father Brown, quite simply, but suddenly standing up,
"for a very short journey.  For one of the shortest, in fact.
But we may still be in time to catch him if we go there in a motor-cab."

     Nothing more could be got out of him until the cab swept
round the corner by the Hotel Saint Louis, where they got out,
and he led the party up a side lane already in deep shadow with
the growing dusk.  Once, when the Duke impatiently asked whether
Hirsch was guilty of treason or not, he answered rather absently:
"No; only of ambition--like Caesar." Then he somewhat inconsequently added:
"He lives a very lonely life; he has had to do everything for himself."

     "Well, if he's ambitious, he ought to be satisfied now,"
said Flambeau rather bitterly.  "All Paris will cheer him
now our cursed Colonel has turned tail."

     "Don't talk so loud," said Father Brown, lowering his voice,
"your cursed Colonel is just in front."

     The other two started and shrank farther back into the shadow
of the wall, for the sturdy figure of their runaway principal
could indeed be seen shuffling along in the twilight in front,
a bag in each hand.  He looked much the same as when they first saw him,
except that he had changed his picturesque mountaineering knickers
for a conventional pair of trousers.  It was clear he was already
escaping from the hotel.

     The lane down which they followed him was one of those that
seem to be at the back of things, and look like the wrong side
of the stage scenery.  A colourless, continuous wall ran down
one flank of it, interrupted at intervals by dull-hued and
dirt-stained doors, all shut fast and featureless save for
the chalk scribbles of some passing gamin.  The tops of trees,
mostly rather depressing evergreens, showed at intervals over
the top of the wall, and beyond them in the grey and purple gloaming
could be seen the back of some long terrace of tall Parisian houses,
really comparatively close, but somehow looking as inaccessible
as a range of marble mountains.  On the other side of the lane ran
the high gilt railings of a gloomy park.

     Flambeau was looking round him in rather a weird way.
"Do you know," he said, "there is something about this place that--"

     "Hullo!" called out the Duke sharply; "that fellow's disappeared.
Vanished, like a blasted fairy!"

     "He has a key," explained their clerical friend.  "He's only gone
into one of these garden doors," and as he spoke they heard one of
the dull wooden doors close again with a click in front of them.

     Flambeau strode up to the door thus shut almost in his face,
and stood in front of it for a moment, biting his black moustache
in a fury of curiosity.  Then he threw up his long arms and
swung himself aloft like a monkey and stood on the top of the wall,
his enormous figure dark against the purple sky, like the dark tree-tops.

     The Duke looked at the priest.  "Dubosc's escape is
more elaborate than we thought," he said; "but I suppose he is
escaping from France."

     "He is escaping from everywhere," answered Father Brown.

     Valognes's eyes brightened, but his voice sank.  "Do you mean
suicide?" he asked.

     "You will not find his body," replied the other.

     A kind of cry came from Flambeau on the wall above.
"My God," he exclaimed in French, "I know what this place is now!
Why, it's the back of the street where old Hirsch lives.  I thought
I could recognize the back of a house as well as the back of a man."

     "And Dubosc's gone in there!" cried the Duke, smiting his hip.
"Why, they'll meet after all!" And with sudden Gallic vivacity
he hopped up on the wall beside Flambeau and sat there positively
kicking his legs with excitement.  The priest alone remained below,
leaning against the wall, with his back to the whole theatre of events,
and looking wistfully across to the park palings and the twinkling,
twilit trees.

     The Duke, however stimulated, had the instincts of an aristocrat,
and desired rather to stare at the house than to spy on it;
but Flambeau, who had the instincts of a burglar (and a detective),
had already swung himself from the wall into the fork of a straggling tree
from which he could crawl quite close to the only illuminated window
in the back of the high dark house.  A red blind had been pulled down
over the light, but pulled crookedly, so that it gaped on one side,
and by risking his neck along a branch that looked as treacherous
as a twig, Flambeau could just see Colonel Dubosc walking about
in a brilliantly-lighted and luxurious bedroom.  But close as Flambeau was
to the house, he heard the words of his colleagues by the wall,
and repeated them in a low voice.

     "Yes, they will meet now after all!"

     "They will never meet," said Father Brown.  "Hirsch was right
when he said that in such an affair the principals must not meet.
Have you read a queer psychological story by Henry James,
of two persons who so perpetually missed meeting each other by accident
that they began to feel quite frightened of each other, and to think
it was fate?  This is something of the kind, but more curious."

     "There are people in Paris who will cure them of such morbid fancies,"
said Valognes vindictively.  "They will jolly well have to meet
if we capture them and force them to fight."

     "They will not meet on the Day of Judgement," said the priest.
"If God Almighty held the truncheon of the lists, if St Michael
blew the trumpet for the swords to cross--even then, if one of them
stood ready, the other would not come."

     "Oh, what does all this mysticism mean?" cried the Duc de Valognes,
impatiently; "why on earth shouldn't they meet like other people?"

     "They are the opposite of each other," said Father Brown,
with a queer kind of smile.  "They contradict each other.
They cancel out, so to speak."

     He continued to gaze at the darkening trees opposite, but Valognes
turned his head sharply at a suppressed exclamation from Flambeau.
That investigator, peering into the lighted room, had just seen
the Colonel, after a pace or two, proceed to take his coat off.
Flambeau's first thought was that this really looked like a fight;
but he soon dropped the thought for another.  The solidity and
squareness of Dubosc's chest and shoulders was all a powerful piece
of padding and came off with his coat.  In his shirt and trousers
he was a comparatively slim gentleman, who walked across the bedroom to
the bathroom with no more pugnacious purpose than that of washing himself.
He bent over a basin, dried his dripping hands and face on a towel,
and turned again so that the strong light fell on his face.
His brown complexion had gone, his big black moustache had gone;
he--was clean-shaven and very pate.  Nothing remained of the Colonel
but his bright, hawk-like, brown eyes.  Under the wall Father Brown
was going on in heavy meditation, as if to himself.

     "It is all just like what I was saying to Flambeau.
These opposites won't do.  They don't work.  They don't fight.
If it's white instead of black, and solid instead of liquid,
and so on all along the line--then there's something wrong, Monsieur,
there's something wrong.  One of these men is fair and the other dark,
one stout and the other slim, one strong and the other weak.
One has a moustache and no beard, so you can't see his mouth;
the other has a beard and no moustache, so you can't see his chin.
One has hair cropped to his skull, but a scarf to hide his neck;
the other has low shirt-collars, but long hair to bide his skull.
It's all too neat and correct, Monsieur, and there's something wrong.
Things made so opposite are things that cannot quarrel.
Wherever the one sticks out the other sinks in.  Like a face and a mask,
like a lock and a key..."

     Flambeau was peering into the house with a visage as white as a sheet.
The occupant of the room was standing with his back to him,
but in front of a looking-glass, and had already fitted round his face
a sort of framework of rank red hair, hanging disordered from the head and
clinging round the jaws and chin while leaving the mocking mouth uncovered.
Seen thus in the glass the white face looked like the face of Judas
laughing horribly and surrounded by capering flames of hell.
For a spasm Flambeau saw the fierce, red-brown eyes dancing,
then they were covered with a pair of blue spectacles.  Slipping on
a loose black coat, the figure vanished towards the front of the house.
A few moments later a roar of popular applause from the street beyond
announced that Dr Hirsch had once more appeared upon the balcony.




IV. The Man in the Passage


TWO men appeared simultaneously at the two ends of a sort of passage
running along the side of the Apollo Theatre in the Adelphi.
The evening daylight in the streets was large and luminous,
opalescent and empty.  The passage was comparatively long and dark,
so each man could see the other as a mere black silhouette at the other end.
Nevertheless, each man knew the other, even in that inky outline;
for they were both men of striking appearance and they hated each other.

     The covered passage opened at one end on one of the steep streets
of the Adelphi, and at the other on a terrace overlooking
the sunset-coloured river.  One side of the passage was a blank wall,
for the building it supported was an old unsuccessful theatre restaurant,
now shut up.  The other side of the passage contained two doors,
one at each end.  Neither was what was commonly called the stage door;
they were a sort of special and private stage doors used by
very special performers, and in this case by the star actor
and actress in the Shakespearean performance of the day.
Persons of that eminence often like to have such private exits
and entrances, for meeting friends or avoiding them.

     The two men in question were certainly two such friends,
men who evidently knew the doors and counted on their opening,
for each approached the door at the upper end with equal coolness
and confidence.  Not, however, with equal speed; but the man
who walked fast was the man from the other end of the tunnel,
so they both arrived before the secret stage door almost at
the same instant.  They saluted each other with civility,
and waited a moment before one of them, the sharper walker
who seemed to have the shorter patience, knocked at the door.

     In this and everything else each man was opposite and neither
could be called inferior.  As private persons both were handsome,
capable and popular.  As public persons, both were in the first public rank.
But everything about them, from their glory to their good looks,
was of a diverse and incomparable kind.  Sir Wilson Seymour was
the kind of man whose importance is known to everybody who knows.
The more you mixed with the innermost ring in every polity or profession,
the more  often you met Sir Wilson Seymour.  He was the one intelligent man
on twenty unintelligent committees--on every sort of subject,
from the reform of the Royal Academy to the project of bimetallism
for Greater Britain.  In the Arts especially he was omnipotent.
He was so unique that nobody could quite decide whether he was
a great aristocrat who had taken up Art, or a great artist whom
the aristocrats had taken up.  But you could not meet him for five minutes
without realizing that you had really been ruled by him all your life.

     His appearance was "distinguished" in exactly the same sense;
it was at once conventional and unique.  Fashion could have found no fault
with his high silk hat--, yet it was unlike anyone else's hat--
a little higher, perhaps, and adding something to his natural height.
His tall, slender figure had a slight stoop yet it looked
the reverse of feeble.  His hair was silver-grey, but he did not look old;
it was worn longer than the common yet he did not look effeminate;
it was curly but it did not look curled.  His carefully pointed beard
made him look more manly and militant than otherwise, as it does in those
old admirals of Velazquez with whose dark portraits his house was hung.
His grey gloves were a shade bluer, his silver-knobbed cane a shade longer
than scores of such gloves and canes flapped and flourished about
the theatres and the restaurants.

     The other man was not so tall, yet would have struck nobody as short,
but merely as strong and handsome.  His hair also was curly,
but fair and cropped close to a strong, massive head--the sort of head
you break a door with, as Chaucer said of the Miller's.
His military moustache and the carriage of his shoulders
showed him a soldier, but he had a pair of those peculiar frank
and piercing blue eyes which are more common in sailors.
His face was somewhat square, his jaw was square, his shoulders
were square, even his jacket was square.  Indeed, in the wild school
of caricature then current, Mr Max Beerbohm had represented him as
a proposition in the fourth book of Euclid.

     For he also was a public man, though with quite another
sort of success.  You did not have to be in the best society
to have heard of Captain Cutler, of the siege of Hong-Kong,
and the great march across China.  You could not get away from
hearing of him wherever you were; his portrait was on every other postcard;
his maps and battles in every other illustrated paper; songs in his honour
in every other music-hall turn or on every other barrel-organ.
His fame, though probably more temporary, was ten times more wide,
popular and spontaneous than the other man's.  In thousands of
English homes he appeared enormous above England, like Nelson.
Yet he had infinitely less power in England than Sir Wilson Seymour.

     The door was opened to them by an aged servant or "dresser",
whose broken-down face and figure and black shabby coat and trousers
contrasted queerly with the glittering interior of the great actress's
dressing-room.  It was fitted and filled with looking-glasses
at every angle of refraction, so that they looked like the hundred facets
of one huge diamond--if one could get inside a diamond.
The other features of luxury, a few flowers, a few coloured cushions,
a few scraps of stage costume, were multiplied by all the mirrors into
the madness of the Arabian Nights, and danced and changed places
perpetually as the shuffling attendant shifted a mirror outwards
or shot one back against the wall.

     They both spoke to the dingy dresser by name, calling him Parkinson,
and asking for the lady as Miss Aurora Rome.  Parkinson said she was
in the other room, but he would go and tell her.  A shade crossed the brow
of both visitors; for the other room was the private room of
the great actor with whom Miss Aurora was performing, and she was
of the kind that does not inflame admiration without inflaming jealousy.
In about half a minute, however, the inner door opened, and she entered
as she always did, even in private life, so that the very silence
seemed to be a roar of applause, and one well-deserved.
She was clad in a somewhat strange garb of peacock green and
peacock blue satins, that gleamed like blue and green metals,
such as delight children and aesthetes, and her heavy, hot brown hair
framed one of those magic faces which are dangerous to all men,
but especially to boys and to men growing grey.  In company with
her male colleague, the great American actor, Isidore Bruno,
she was producing a particularly poetical and fantastic interpretation
of Midsummer Night's Dream:  in which the artistic prominence was given
to Oberon and Titania, or in other words to Bruno and herself.
Set in dreamy and exquisite scenery, and moving in mystical dances,
the green costume, like burnished beetle-wings, expressed all the
elusive individuality of an elfin queen.  But when personally confronted
in what was still broad daylight, a man looked only at the woman's face.

     She greeted both men with the beaming and baffling smile
which kept so many males at the same just dangerous distance from her.
She accepted some flowers from Cutler, which were as tropical and expensive
as his victories; and another sort of present from Sir Wilson Seymour,
offered later on and more nonchalantly by that gentleman.
For it was against his breeding to show eagerness, and against his
conventional unconventionality to give anything so obvious as flowers.
He had picked up a trifle, he said, which was rather a curiosity,
it was an ancient Greek dagger of the Mycenaean Epoch, and might well
have been worn in the time of Theseus and Hippolyta.  It was made of brass
like all the Heroic weapons, but, oddly enough, sharp enough
to prick anyone still.  He had really been attracted to it by
the leaf-like shape; it was as perfect as a Greek vase.
If it was of any interest to Miss Rome or could come in anywhere
in the play, he hoped she would--

     The inner door burst open and a big figure appeared, who was
more of a contrast to the explanatory Seymour than even Captain Cutler.
Nearly six-foot-six, and of more than theatrical thews and muscles,
Isidore Bruno, in the gorgeous leopard skin and golden-brown garments
of Oberon, looked like a barbaric god.  He leaned on a sort of
hunting-spear, which across a theatre looked a slight, silvery wand,
but which in the small and comparatively crowded room looked as plain as
a pike-staff--and as menacing.  His vivid black eyes rolled volcanically,
his bronzed face, handsome as it was, showed at that moment
a combination of high cheekbones with set white teeth, which recalled
certain American conjectures about his origin in the Southern plantations.

     "Aurora," he began, in that deep voice like a drum of passion
that had moved so many audiences, "will you--"

     He stopped indecisively because a sixth figure had suddenly
presented itself just inside the doorway--a figure so incongruous
in the scene as to be almost comic.  It was a very short man in
the black uniform of the Roman secular clergy, and looking
(especially in such a presence as Bruno's and Aurora's) rather like
the wooden Noah out of an ark.  He did not, however, seem conscious
of any contrast, but said with dull civility: "I believe Miss Rome
sent for me."

     A shrewd observer might have remarked that the emotional temperature
rather rose at so unemotional an interruption.  The detachment of
a professional celibate seemed to reveal to the others that they
stood round the woman as a ring of amorous rivals; just as a stranger
coming in with frost on his coat will reveal that a room is like a furnace.
The presence of the one man who did not care about her
increased Miss Rome's sense that everybody else was in love with her,
and each in a somewhat dangerous way:  the actor with all the appetite
of a savage and a spoilt child; the soldier with all the simple selfishness
of a man of will rather than mind; Sir Wilson with that daily hardening
concentration with which old Hedonists take to a hobby; nay,
even the abject Parkinson, who had known her before her triumphs,
and who followed her about the room with eyes or feet,
with the dumb fascination of a dog.

     A shrewd person might also have noted a yet odder thing.
The man like a black wooden Noah (who was not wholly without shrewdness)
noted it with a considerable but contained amusement.  It was evident
that the great Aurora, though by no means indifferent to the admiration
of the other sex, wanted at this moment to get rid of all the men
who admired her and be left alone with the man who did not--
did not admire her in that sense at least; for the little priest
did admire and even enjoy the firm feminine diplomacy with which
she set about her task.  There was, perhaps, only one thing
that Aurora Rome was clever about, and that was one half of humanity--
the other half.  The little priest watched, like a Napoleonic campaign,
the swift precision of her policy for expelling all while banishing none.
Bruno, the big actor, was so babyish that it was easy to send him off
in brute sulks, banging the door.  Cutler, the British officer,
was pachydermatous to ideas, but punctilious about behaviour.
He would ignore all hints, but he would die rather than
ignore a definite commission from a lady.  As to old Seymour,
he had to be treated differently; he had to be left to the last.
The only way to move him was to appeal to him in confidence as an old
friend, to let him into the secret of the clearance.  The priest did
really admire Miss Rome as she achieved all these three objects
in one selected action.

     She went across to Captain Cutler and said in her sweetest manner:
"I shall value all these flowers, because they must be your
favourite flowers.  But they won't be complete, you know,
without my favourite flower.  Do go over to that shop round the corner
and get me some lilies-of-the-valley, and then it will be quite lovely."

     The first object of her diplomacy, the exit of the enraged Bruno,
was at once achieved.  He had already handed his spear in a lordly style,
like a sceptre, to the piteous Parkinson, and was about to assume
one of the cushioned seats like a throne.  But at this open appeal to
his rival there glowed in his opal eyeballs all the sensitive insolence
of the slave; he knotted his enormous brown fists for an instant,
and then, dashing open the door, disappeared into his own apartments beyond.
But meanwhile Miss Rome's experiment in mobilizing the British Army
had not succeeded so simply as seemed probable.  Cutler had indeed
risen stiffly and suddenly, and walked towards the door, hatless,
as if at a word of command.  But perhaps there was something
ostentatiously elegant about the languid figure of Seymour leaning against
one of the looking-glasses that brought him up short at the entrance,
turning his head this way and that like a bewildered bulldog.

     "I must show this stupid man where to go," said Aurora
in a whisper to Seymour, and ran out to the threshold to speed
the parting guest.

     Seymour seemed to be listening, elegant and unconscious
as was his posture, and he seemed relieved when he heard the lady call out
some last instructions to the Captain, and then turn sharply
and run laughing down the passage towards the other end,
the end on the terrace above the Thames.  Yet a second or two after
Seymour's brow darkened again.  A man in his position has so many rivals,
and he remembered that at the other end of the passage was
the corresponding entrance to Bruno's private room.  He did not
lose his dignity; he said some civil words to Father Brown
about the revival of Byzantine architecture in the Westminster Cathedral,
and then, quite naturally, strolled out himself into the upper end
of the passage.  Father Brown and Parkinson were left alone,
and they were neither of them men with a taste for superfluous conversation.
The dresser went round the room, pulling out looking-glasses
and pushing them in again, his dingy dark coat and trousers looking
all the more dismal since he was still holding the festive fairy spear
of King Oberon.  Every time he pulled out the frame of a new glass,
a new black figure of Father Brown appeared; the absurd glass chamber
was full of Father Browns, upside down in the air like angels,
turning somersaults like acrobats, turning their backs to everybody
like very rude persons.

     Father Brown seemed quite unconscious of this cloud of witnesses,
but followed Parkinson with an idly attentive eye till he took himself
and his absurd spear into the farther room of Bruno.  Then he abandoned
himself to such abstract meditations as always amused him--
calculating the angles of the mirrors, the angles of each refraction,
the angle at which each must fit into the wall...when he heard
a strong but strangled cry.

     He sprang to his feet and stood rigidly listening.
At the same instant Sir Wilson Seymour burst back into the room,
white as ivory.  "Who's that man in the passage?" he cried.
"Where's that dagger of mine?"

     Before Father Brown could turn in his heavy boots Seymour was
plunging about the room looking for the weapon.  And before he could
possibly find that weapon or any other, a brisk running of feet
broke upon the pavement outside, and the square face of Cutler
was thrust into the same doorway.  He was still grotesquely grasping
a bunch of lilies-of-the-valley.  "What's this?" he cried.
"What's that creature down the passage?  Is this some of your tricks?"

     "My tricks!" hissed his pale rival, and made a stride towards him.

     In the instant of time in which all this happened Father Brown
stepped out into the top of the passage, looked down it,
and at once walked briskly towards what he saw.

     At this the other two men dropped their quarrel and darted after him,
Cutler calling out:  "What are you doing?  Who are you?"

     "My name is Brown," said the priest sadly, as he bent over something
and straightened himself again.  "Miss Rome sent for me,
and I came as quickly as I could.  I have come too late."

     The three men looked down, and in one of them at least
the life died in that late light of afternoon.  It ran along
the passage like a path of gold, and in the midst of it Aurora Rome lay
lustrous in her robes of green and gold, with her dead face
turned upwards.  Her dress was torn away as in a struggle,
leaving the right shoulder bare, but the wound from which
the blood was welling was on the other side.  The brass dagger
lay flat and gleaming a yard or so away.

     There was a blank stillness for a measurable time, so that
they could hear far off a flower-girl's laugh outside Charing Cross,
and someone whistling furiously for a taxicab in one of the streets
off the Strand.  Then the Captain, with a movement so sudden that it
might have been passion or play-acting, took Sir Wilson Seymour by the
throat.

     Seymour looked at him steadily without either fight or fear.
"You need not kill me," he said in a voice quite cold; "I shall do
that on my own account."

     The Captain's hand hesitated and dropped; and the other added
with the same icy candour:  "If I find I haven't the nerve
to do it with that dagger I can do it in a month with drink."

     "Drink isn't good enough for me," replied Cutler, "but I'll have
blood for this before I die.  Not yours--but I think I know whose."

     And before the others could appreciate his intention
he snatched up the dagger, sprang at the other door at the lower end
of the passage, burst it open, bolt and all, and confronted Bruno
in his dressing-room.  As he did so, old Parkinson tottered
in his wavering way out of the door and caught sight of the corpse
lying in the passage.  He moved shakily towards it; looked at it weakly
with a working face; then moved shakily back into the dressing-room again,
and sat down suddenly on one of the richly cushioned chairs.
Father Brown instantly ran across to him, taking no notice of Cutler
and the colossal actor, though the room already rang with their blows
and they began to struggle for the dagger.  Seymour, who retained some
practical sense, was whistling for the police at the end of the passage.

     When the police arrived it was to tear the two men
from an almost ape-like grapple; and, after a few formal inquiries,
to arrest Isidore Bruno upon a charge of murder, brought against him
by his furious opponent.  The idea that the great national hero of the hour
had arrested a wrongdoer with his own hand doubtless had its weight
with the police, who are not without elements of the journalist.
They treated Cutler with a certain solemn attention, and pointed out
that he had got a slight slash on the hand.  Even as Cutler
bore him back across tilted chair and table, Bruno had twisted
the dagger out of his grasp and disabled him just below the wrist.
The injury was really slight, but till he was removed from the room
the half-savage prisoner stared at the running blood with a steady smile.

     "Looks a cannibal sort of chap, don't he?" said the constable
confidentially to Cutler.

     Cutler made no answer, but said sharply a moment after:
"We must attend to the...the death..." and his voice escaped
from articulation.

     "The two deaths," came in the voice of the priest from
the farther side of the room.  "This poor fellow was gone
when I got across to him." And he stood looking down at old Parkinson,
who sat in a black huddle on the gorgeous chair.  He also had
paid his tribute, not without eloquence, to the woman who had died.

     The silence was first broken by Cutler, who seemed not untouched
by a rough tenderness.  "I wish I was him," he said huskily.
"I remember he used to watch her wherever she walked more than--anybody.
She was his air, and he's dried up.  He's just dead."

     "We are all dead," said Seymour in a strange voice,
looking down the road.

     They took leave of Father Brown at the corner of the road,
with some random apologies for any rudeness they might have shown.
Both their faces were tragic, but also cryptic.

     The mind of the little priest was always a rabbit-warren
of wild thoughts that jumped too quickly for him to catch them.
Like the white tail of a rabbit he had the vanishing thought that
he was certain of their grief, but not so certain of their innocence.

     "We had better all be going," said Seymour heavily; "we have done
all we can to help."

     "Will you understand my motives," asked Father Brown quietly,
"if I say you have done all you can to hurt?"

     They both started as if guiltily, and Cutler said sharply:
"To hurt whom?"

     "To hurt yourselves," answered the priest.  "I would not
add to your troubles if it weren't common justice to warn you.
You've done nearly everything you could do to hang yourselves,
if this actor should be acquitted.  They'll be sure to subpoena me;
I shall be bound to say that after the cry was heard each of you
rushed into the room in a wild state and began quarrelling about a dagger.
As far as my words on oath can go, you might either of you have done it.
You hurt yourselves with that; and then Captain Cutler must have
hurt himself with the dagger."

     "Hurt myself!" exclaimed the Captain, with contempt.
"A silly little scratch."

     "Which drew blood," replied the priest, nodding.  "We know there's
blood on the brass now.  And so we shall never know whether there was
blood on it before."

     There was a silence; and then Seymour said, with an emphasis
quite alien to his daily accent:  "But I saw a man in the passage."

     "I know you did," answered the cleric Brown with a face of wood,
"so did Captain Cutler.  That's what seems so improbable."

     Before either could make sufficient sense of it even to answer,
Father Brown had politely excused himself and gone stumping
up the road with his stumpy old umbrella.

     As modern newspapers are conducted, the most honest
and most important news is the police news.  If it be true that
in the twentieth century more space is given to murder than to politics,
it is for the excellent reason that murder is a more serious subject.
But even this would hardly explain the enormous omnipresence and
widely distributed detail of "The Bruno Case," or "The Passage Mystery,"
in the Press of London and the provinces.  So vast was the excitement
that for some weeks the Press really told the truth; and the reports
of examination and cross-examination, if interminable,
even if intolerable are at least reliable.  The true reason,
of course, was the coincidence of persons.  The victim was
a popular actress; the accused was a popular actor; and the accused
had been caught red-handed, as it were, by the most popular soldier
of the patriotic season.  In those extraordinary circumstances
the Press was paralysed into probity and accuracy; and the rest of this
somewhat singular business can practically be recorded from reports
of Bruno's trial.

     The trial was presided over by Mr Justice Monkhouse,
one of those who are jeered at as humorous judges, but who are generally
much more serious than the serious judges, for their levity comes from
a living impatience of professional solemnity; while the serious judge
is really filled with frivolity, because he is filled with vanity.
All the chief actors being of a worldly importance, the barristers
were well balanced; the prosecutor for the Crown was Sir Walter Cowdray,
a heavy, but weighty advocate of the sort that knows how to seem
English and trustworthy, and how to be rhetorical with reluctance.
The prisoner was defended by Mr Patrick Butler, K.C., who was mistaken
for a mere flaneur by those who misunderstood the Irish character--
and those who had not been examined by him.  The medical evidence
involved no contradictions, the doctor, whom Seymour had summoned
on the spot, agreeing with the eminent surgeon who had later
examined the body.  Aurora Rome had been stabbed with some sharp instrument
such as a knife or dagger; some instrument, at least, of which
the blade was short.  The wound was just over the heart, and she had
died instantly.  When the doctor first saw her she could hardly
have been dead for twenty minutes.  Therefore when Father Brown
found her she could hardly have been dead for three.

     Some official detective evidence followed, chiefly concerned with
the presence or absence of any proof of a struggle; the only suggestion
of this was the tearing of the dress at the shoulder, and this did not seem
to fit in particularly well with the direction and finality of the blow.
When these details had been supplied, though not explained,
the first of the important witnesses was called.

     Sir Wilson Seymour gave evidence as he did everything else
that he did at all--not only well, but perfectly.  Though himself
much more of a public man than the judge, he conveyed exactly
the fine shade of self-effacement before the King's justice;
and though everyone looked at him as they would at the Prime Minister
or the Archbishop of Canterbury, they could have said nothing
of his part in it but that it was that of a private gentleman,
with an accent on the noun.  He was also refreshingly lucid,
as he was on the committees.  He had been calling on Miss Rome
at the theatre; he had met Captain Cutler there; they had been joined
for a short time by the accused, who had then returned to his
own dressing-room; they had then been joined by a Roman Catholic priest,
who asked for the deceased lady and said his name was Brown.
Miss Rome had then gone just outside the theatre to the entrance
of the passage, in order to point out to Captain Cutler a flower-shop
at which he was to buy her some more flowers; and the witness
had remained in the room, exchanging a few words with the priest.
He had then distinctly heard the deceased, having sent the Captain
on his errand, turn round laughing and run down the passage
towards its other end, where was the prisoner's dressing-room.
In idle curiosity as to the rapid movement of his friends,
he had strolled out to the head of the passage himself and looked down it
towards the prisoner's door.  Did he see anything in the passage?
Yes; he saw something in the passage.

     Sir Walter Cowdray allowed an impressive interval,
during which the witness looked down, and for all his usual composure
seemed to have more than his usual pallor.  Then the barrister said
in a lower voice, which seemed at once sympathetic and creepy:
"Did you see it distinctly?"

     Sir Wilson Seymour, however moved, had his excellent brains
in full working-order.  "Very distinctly as regards its outline,
but quite indistinctly, indeed not at all, as regards the details
inside the outline.  The passage is of such length that anyone in
the middle of it appears quite black against the light at the other end."
The witness lowered his steady eyes once more and added:
"I had noticed the fact before, when Captain Cutler first entered it."
There was another silence, and the judge leaned forward and made a note.

     "Well," said Sir Walter patiently, "what was the outline like?
Was it, for instance, like the figure of the murdered woman?"

     "Not in the least," answered Seymour quietly.

     "What did it look like to you?"

     "It looked to me," replied the witness, "like a tall man."

     Everyone in court kept his eyes riveted on his pen,
or his umbrella-handle, or his book, or his boots or whatever
he happened to be looking at.  They seemed to be holding their eyes
away from the prisoner by main force; but they felt his figure in the dock,
and they felt it as gigantic.  Tall as Bruno was to the eye,
he seemed to swell taller and taller when an eyes had been
torn away from him.

     Cowdray was resuming his seat with his solemn face,
smoothing his black silk robes, and white silk whiskers.
Sir Wilson was leaving the witness-box, after a few final particulars
to which there were many other witnesses, when the counsel for the defence
sprang up and stopped him.

     "I shall only detain you a moment," said Mr Butler,
who was a rustic-looking person with red eyebrows and an expression
of partial slumber.  "Will you tell his lordship how you knew
it was a man?"

     A faint, refined smile seemed to pass over Seymour's features.
"I'm afraid it is the vulgar test of trousers," he said.
"When I saw daylight between the long legs I was sure it was a man,
after all."

     Butler's sleepy eyes opened as suddenly as some silent explosion.
"After all!" he repeated slowly.  "So you did think at first
it was a woman?"

     Seymour looked troubled for the first time.  "It is hardly
a point of fact," he said, "but if his lordship would like me
to answer for my impression, of course I shall do so.  There was something
about the thing that was not exactly a woman and yet was not quite a man;
somehow the curves were different.  And it had something that looked like
long hair."

     "Thank you," said Mr Butler, K.C., and sat down suddenly,
as if he had got what he wanted.

     Captain Cutler was a far less plausible and composed witness
than Sir Wilson, but his account of the opening incidents was
solidly the same.  He described the return of Bruno to his dressing-room,
the dispatching of himself to buy a bunch of lilies-of-the-valley,
his return to the upper end of the passage, the thing he saw
in the passage, his suspicion of Seymour, and his struggle with Bruno.
But he could give little artistic assistance about the black figure
that he and Seymour had seen.  Asked about its outline, he said he
was no art critic--with a somewhat too obvious sneer at Seymour.
Asked if it was a man or a woman, he said it looked more like a beast--
with a too obvious snarl at the prisoner.  But the man was plainly shaken
with sorrow and sincere anger, and Cowdray quickly excused him
from confirming facts that were already fairly clear.

     The defending counsel also was again brief in his cross-examination;
although (as was his custom) even in being brief, he seemed to take
a long time about it.  "You used a rather remarkable expression," he said,
looking at Cutler sleepily.  "What do you mean by saying that
it looked more like a beast than a man or a woman?"

     Cutler seemed seriously agitated.  "Perhaps I oughtn't to have
said that," he said; "but when the brute has huge humped shoulders
like a chimpanzee, and bristles sticking out of its head like a pig--"

     Mr Butler cut short his curious impatience in the middle.
"Never mind whether its hair was like a pig's," he said,
"was it like a woman's?"

     "A woman's!" cried the soldier.  "Great Scott, no!"

     "The last witness said it was," commented the counsel,
with unscrupulous swiftness.  "And did the figure have any of those
serpentine and semi-feminine curves to which eloquent allusion
has been made?  No?  No feminine curves?  The figure, if I understand you,
was rather heavy and square than otherwise?"

     "He may have been bending forward," said Cutler, in a hoarse
and rather faint voice.

     "Or again, he may not," said Mr Butler, and sat down suddenly
for the second time.

     The third, witness called by Sir Walter Cowdray was
the little Catholic clergyman, so little, compared with the others,
that his head seemed hardly to come above the box, so that it was like
cross-examining a child.  But unfortunately Sir Walter had somehow
got it into his head (mostly by some ramifications of his family's religion)
that Father Brown was on the side of the prisoner, because the prisoner
was wicked and foreign and even partly black.  Therefore he
took Father Brown up sharply whenever that proud pontiff tried
to explain anything; and told him to answer yes or no, and tell
the plain facts without any jesuitry.  When Father Brown began,
in his simplicity, to say who he thought the man in the passage was,
the barrister told him that he did not want his theories.

     "A black shape was seen in the passage.  And you say you saw
the black shape.  Well, what shape was it?"

     Father Brown blinked as under rebuke; but he had long known
the literal nature of obedience.  "The shape," he said, "was short
and thick, but had two sharp, black projections curved upwards
on each side of the head or top, rather like horns, and--"

     "Oh! the devil with horns, no doubt," ejaculated Cowdray,
sitting down in triumphant jocularity.  "It was the devil come
to eat Protestants."

     "No," said the priest dispassionately; "I know who it was."

     Those in court had been wrought up to an irrational,
but real sense of some monstrosity.  They had forgotten the figure
in the dock and thought only of the figure in the passage.
And the figure in the passage, described by three capable
and respectable men who had all seen it, was a shifting nightmare:
one called it a woman, and the other a beast, and the other a devil....

     The judge was looking at Father Brown with level and piercing eyes.
"You are a most extraordinary witness," he said; "but there is something
about you that makes me think you are trying to tell the truth.
Well, who was the man you saw in the passage?"

     "He was myself," said Father Brown.

     Butler, K.C., sprang to his feet in an extraordinary stillness,
and said quite calmly:  "Your lordship will allow me to cross-examine?"
And then, without stopping, he shot at Brown the apparently
disconnected question:  "You have heard about this dagger;
you know the experts say the crime was committed with a short blade?"

     "A short blade," assented Brown, nodding solemnly like an owl,
"but a very long hilt."

     Before the audience could quite dismiss the idea that the priest
had really seen himself doing murder with a short dagger with a long hilt
(which seemed somehow to make it more horrible), he had himself
hurried on to explain.

     "I mean daggers aren't the only things with short blades.
Spears have short blades.  And spears catch at the end of the steel
just like daggers, if they're that sort of fancy spear they had
in theatres; like the spear poor old Parkinson killed his wife with,
just when she'd sent for me to settle their family troubles--
and I came just too late, God forgive me!  But he died penitent--
he just died of being penitent.  He couldn't bear what he'd done."

     The general impression in court was that the little priest,
who was gobbling away, had literally gone mad in the box.
But the judge still looked at him with bright and steady eyes of interest;
and the counsel for the defence went on with his questions unperturbed.

     "If Parkinson did it with that pantomime spear," said Butler,
"he must have thrust from four yards away.  How do you account for
signs of struggle, like the dress dragged off the shoulder?" He had
slipped into treating his mere witness as an expert; but no one
noticed it now.

     "The poor lady's dress was torn," said the witness,
"because it was caught in a panel that slid to just behind her.
She struggled to free herself, and as she did so Parkinson came out
of the prisoner's room and lunged with the spear."

     "A panel?" repeated the barrister in a curious voice.

     "It was a looking-glass on the other side," explained Father Brown.
"When I was in the dressing-room I noticed that some of them
could probably be slid out into the passage."

     There was another vast and unnatural silence, and this time
it was the judge who spoke.  "So you really mean that when you
looked down that passage, the man you saw was yourself--in a mirror?"

     "Yes, my lord; that was what I was trying to say," said Brown,
"but they asked me for the shape; and our hats have corners
just like horns, and so I--"

     The judge leaned forward, his old eyes yet more brilliant,
and said in specially distinct tones:  "Do you really mean to say that
when Sir Wilson Seymour saw that wild what-you-call-him with curves
and a woman's hair and a man's trousers, what he saw was
Sir Wilson Seymour?"

     "Yes, my lord," said Father Brown.

     "And you mean to say that when Captain Cutler saw that chimpanzee
with humped shoulders and hog's bristles, he simply saw himself?"

     "Yes, my lord."

     The judge leaned back in his chair with a luxuriance in which
it was hard to separate the cynicism and the admiration.
"And can you tell us why," he asked, "you should know your own figure
in a looking-glass, when two such distinguished men don't?"

     Father Brown blinked even more painfully than before;
then he stammered:  "Really, my lord, I don't know unless it's because
I don't look at it so often."




V. The Mistake of the Machine


FLAMBEAU and his friend the priest were sitting in the Temple Gardens
about sunset; and their neighbourhood or some such accidental influence
had turned their talk to matters of legal process.  From the problem
of the licence in cross-examination, their talk strayed to Roman and
mediaeval torture, to the examining magistrate in France and
the Third Degree in America.

     "I've been reading," said Flambeau, "of this new psychometric method
they talk about so much, especially in America.  You know what I mean;
they put a pulsometer on a man's wrist and judge by how his heart goes
at the pronunciation of certain words.  What do you think of it?"

     "I think it very interesting," replied Father Brown;
"it reminds me of that interesting idea in the Dark Ages that blood
would flow from a corpse if the murderer touched it."

     "Do you really mean," demanded his friend, "that you think
the two methods equally valuable?"

     "I think them equally valueless," replied Brown.  "Blood flows,
fast or slow, in dead folk or living, for so many more million reasons
than we can ever know.  Blood will have to flow very funnily;
blood will have to flow up the Matterhorn, before I will take it
as a sign that I am to shed it."

     "The method," remarked the other, "has been guaranteed
by some of the greatest American men of science."

     "What sentimentalists men of science are!" exclaimed Father Brown,
"and how much more sentimental must American men of science be!
Who but a Yankee would think of proving anything from heart-throbs?
Why, they must be as sentimental as a man who thinks a woman
is in love with him if she blushes.  That's a test from
the circulation of the blood, discovered by the immortal Harvey;
and a jolly rotten test, too."

     "But surely," insisted Flambeau, "it might point pretty straight
at something or other."

     "There's a disadvantage in a stick pointing straight,"
answered the other.  "What is it?  Why, the other end of the stick
always points the opposite way.  It depends whether you
get hold of the stick by the right end.  I saw the thing done once
and I've never believed in it since." And he proceeded to tell
the story of his disillusionment.

     It happened nearly twenty years before, when he was chaplain
to his co-religionists in a prison in Chicago--where the Irish population
displayed a capacity both for crime and penitence which kept him
tolerably busy.  The official second-in-command under the Governor
was an ex-detective named Greywood Usher, a cadaverous, careful-spoken
Yankee philosopher, occasionally varying a very rigid visage
with an odd apologetic grimace.  He liked Father Brown in
a slightly patronizing way; and Father Brown liked him,
though he heartily disliked his theories.  His theories were
extremely complicated and were held with extreme simplicity.

     One evening he had sent for the priest, who, according to his custom,
took a seat in silence at a table piled and littered with papers,
and waited.  The official selected from the papers a scrap of
newspaper cutting, which he handed across to the cleric,
who read it gravely.  It appeared to be an extract from one of
the pinkest of American Society papers, and ran as follows:

     "Society's brightest widower is once more on the Freak Dinner stunt.
All our exclusive citizens will recall the Perambulator Parade Dinner,
in which Last-Trick Todd, at his palatial home at Pilgrim's Pond,
caused so many of our prominent debutantes to look even younger
than their years.  Equally elegant and more miscellaneous and
large-hearted in social outlook was Last-Trick's show the year previous,
the popular Cannibal Crush Lunch, at which the confections handed round
were sarcastically moulded in the forms of human arms and legs,
and during which more than one of our gayest mental gymnasts was heard
offering to eat his partner.  The witticism which will inspire
this evening is as yet in Mr Todd's pretty reticent intellect,
or locked in the jewelled bosoms of our city's gayest leaders;
but there is talk of a pretty parody of the simple manners and customs
at the other end of Society's scale.  This would be all the more telling,
as hospitable Todd is entertaining in Lord Falconroy, the famous traveller,
a true-blooded aristocrat fresh from England's oak-groves.
Lord Falconroy's travels began before his ancient feudal title
was resurrected, he was in the Republic in his youth, and fashion murmurs
a sly reason for his return.  Miss Etta Todd is one of our
deep-souled New Yorkers, and comes into an income of nearly
twelve hundred million dollars."

     "Well," asked Usher, "does that interest you?"

     "Why, words rather fail me," answered Father Brown.
"I cannot think at this moment of anything in this world that would
interest me less.  And, unless the just anger of the Republic is
at last going to electrocute journalists for writing like that,
I don't quite see why it should interest you either."

     "Ah!" said Mr Usher dryly, and handing across another
scrap of newspaper.  "Well, does that interest you?"

     The paragraph was headed "Savage Murder of a Warder.
Convict Escapes," and ran:  "Just before dawn this morning
a shout for help was heard in the Convict Settlement at Sequah
in this State.  The authorities, hurrying in the direction of the cry,
found the corpse of the warder who patrols the top of the north wall
of the prison, the steepest and most difficult exit, for which one man
has always been found sufficient.  The unfortunate officer had,
however, been hurled from the high wall, his brains beaten out
as with a club, and his gun was missing.  Further inquiries showed that
one of the cells was empty; it had been occupied by a rather sullen ruffian
giving his name as Oscar Rian.  He was only temporarily detained
for some comparatively trivial assault; but he gave everyone the impression
of a man with a black past and a dangerous future.  Finally,
when daylight bad fully revealed the scene of murder, it was found
that he had written on the wall above the body a fragmentary sentence,
apparently with a finger dipped in blood:  `This was self-defence and
he had the gun.  I meant no harm to him or any man but one.
I am keeping the bullet for Pilgrim's Pond--O.R.'  A man must have used
most fiendish treachery or most savage and amazing bodily daring
to have stormed such a wall in spite of an armed man."

     "Well, the literary style is somewhat improved," admitted the priest
cheerfully, "but still I don't see what I can do for you.
I should cut a poor figure, with my short legs, running about this State
after an athletic assassin of that sort.  I doubt whether
anybody could find him.  The convict settlement at Sequah
is thirty miles from here; the country between is wild and tangled enough,
and the country beyond, where he will surely have the sense to go,
is a perfect no-man's land tumbling away to the prairies.
He may be in any hole or up any tree."

     "He isn't in any hole," said the governor; "he isn't up any tree."

     "Why, how do you know?" asked Father Brown, blinking.

     "Would you like to speak to him?" inquired Usher.

     Father Brown opened his innocent eyes wide.  "He is here?"
he exclaimed.  "Why, how did your men get hold of him?"

     "I got hold of him myself," drawled the American, rising and
lazily stretching his lanky legs before the fire.  "I got hold of him
with the crooked end of a walking-stick.  Don't look so surprised.
I really did.  You know I sometimes take a turn in the country lanes
outside this dismal place; well, I was walking early this evening
up a steep lane with dark hedges and grey-looking ploughed fields
on both sides; and a young moon was up and silvering the road.
By the light of it I saw a man running across the field towards the road;
running with his body bent and at a good mile-race trot.
He appeared to be much exhausted; but when he came to the thick black hedge
he went through it as if it were made of spiders' webs; --or rather
(for I heard the strong branches breaking and snapping like bayonets)
as if he himself were made of stone.  In the instant in which
he appeared up against the moon, crossing the road, I slung my hooked cane
at his legs, tripping him and bringing him down.  Then I blew my whistle
long and loud, and our fellows came running up to secure him."

     "It would have been rather awkward," remarked Brown,
"if you had found he was a popular athlete practising a mile race."

     "He was not," said Usher grimly.  "We soon found out who he was;
but I had guessed it with the first glint of the moon on him."

     "You thought it was the runaway convict," observed the priest simply,
"because you had read in the newspaper cutting that morning that
a convict had run away."

     "I had somewhat better grounds," replied the governor coolly.
"I pass over the first as too simple to be emphasized--
I mean that fashionable athletes do not run across ploughed fields
or scratch their eyes out in bramble hedges.  Nor do they run
all doubled up like a crouching dog.  There were more decisive details
to a fairly well-trained eye.  The man was clad in coarse
and ragged clothes, but they were something more than merely
coarse and ragged.  They were so ill-fitting as to be quite grotesque;
even as he appeared in black outline against the moonrise,
the coat-collar in which his head was buried made him look
like a hunchback, and the long loose sleeves looked as if he had no hands.
It at once occurred to me that he had somehow managed to change
his convict clothes for some confederate's clothes which did not fit him.
Second, there was a pretty stiff wind against which he was running;
so that I must have seen the streaky look of blowing hair, if the hair
had not been very short.  Then I remembered that beyond these
ploughed fields he was crossing lay Pilgrim's Pond, for which
(you will remember) the convict was keeping his bullet;
and I sent my walking-stick flying."

     "A brilliant piece of rapid deduction," said Father Brown;
"but had he got a gun?"

     As Usher stopped abruptly in his walk the priest added apologetically:
"I've been told a bullet is not half so useful without it."

     "He had no gun," said the other gravely; "but that was doubtless
due to some very natural mischance or change of plans.  Probably the
same policy that made him change the clothes made him drop the gun;
he began to repent the coat he had left behind him in the blood
of his victim."

     "Well, that is possible enough," answered the priest.

     "And it's hardly worth speculating on," said Usher,
turning to some other papers, "for we know it's the man by this time."

     His clerical friend asked faintly:  "But how?"  And Greywood Usher
threw down the newspapers and took up the two press-cuttings again.

     "Well, since you are so obstinate," he said, "let's begin
at the beginning.  You will notice that these two cuttings have only
one thing in common, which is the mention of Pilgrim's Pond,
the estate, as you know, of the millionaire Ireton Todd.
You also know that he is a remarkable character; one of those
that rose on stepping-stones--"

     "Of our dead selves to higher things," assented his companion.
"Yes; I know that.  Petroleum, I think."

     "Anyhow," said Usher, "Last-Trick Todd counts for a great deal
in this rum affair."

     He stretched himself once more before the fire and continued talking
in his expansive, radiantly explanatory style.

     "To begin with, on the face of it, there is no mystery here at all.
It is not mysterious, it is not even odd, that a jailbird should
take his gun to Pilgrim's Pond.  Our people aren't like the English,
who will forgive a man for being rich if he throws away money
on hospitals or horses.  Last-Trick Todd has made himself big
by his own considerable abilities; and there's no doubt that
many of those on whom he has shown his abilities would like to
show theirs on him with a shot-gun.  Todd might easily get dropped
by some man he'd never even heard of; some labourer he'd locked out,
or some clerk in a business he'd busted.  Last-Trick is a man
of mental endowments and a high public character; but in this country
the relations of employers and employed are considerably strained.

     "That's how the whole thing looks supposing this Rian
made for Pilgrim's Pond to kill Todd.  So it looked to me,
till another little discovery woke up what I have of the detective in me.
When I had my prisoner safe, I picked up my cane again and strolled down
the two or three turns of country road that brought me to one of
the side entrances of Todd's grounds, the one nearest to the pool
or lake after which the place is named.  It was some two hours ago,
about seven by this time; the moonlight was more luminous,
and I could see the long white streaks of it lying on the mysterious mere
with its grey, greasy, half-liquid shores in which they say
our fathers used to make witches walk until they sank.
I'd forgotten the exact tale; but you know the place I mean;
it lies north of Todd's house towards the wilderness, and has two queer
wrinkled trees, so dismal that they look more like huge fungoids
than decent foliage.  As I stood peering at this misty pool,
I fancied I saw the faint figure of a man moving from the house towards it,
but it was all too dim and distant for one to be certain of the fact,
and still less of the details.  Besides, my attention was very sharply
arrested by something much closer.  I crouched behind the fence
which ran not more than two hundred yards from one wing of
the great mansion, and which was fortunately split in places,
as if specially for the application of a cautious eye.  A door had opened
in the dark bulk of the left wing, and a figure appeared black against
the illuminated interior--a muffled figure bending forward,
evidently peering out into the night.  It closed the door behind it,
and I saw it was carrying a lantern, which threw a patch of imperfect light
on the dress and figure of the wearer.  It seemed to be
the figure of a woman, wrapped up in a ragged cloak and
evidently disguised to avoid notice; there was something very strange
both about the rags and the furtiveness in a person coming out of
those rooms lined with gold.  She took cautiously the curved garden path
which brought her within half a hundred yards of me--, then she stood up
for an instant on the terrace of turf that looks towards the slimy lake,
and holding her flaming lantern above her head she deliberately swung it
three times to and fro as for a signal.  As she swung it the second time
a flicker of its light fell for a moment on her own face,
a face that I knew.  She was unnaturally pale, and her head was bundled
in her borrowed plebeian shawl; but I am certain it was Etta Todd,
the millionaire's daughter.

     "She retraced her steps in equal secrecy and the door
closed behind her again.  I was about to climb the fence and follow,
when I realized that the detective fever that had lured me
into the adventure was rather undignified; and that in a more
authoritative capacity I already held all the cards in my hand.
I was just turning away when a new noise broke on the night.
A window was thrown up in one of the upper floors, but just round
the corner of the house so that I could not see it; and a voice
of terrible distinctness was heard shouting across the dark garden
to know where Lord Falconroy was, for he was missing from every room
in the house.  There was no mistaking that voice.  I have
heard it on many a political platform or meeting of directors;
it was Ireton Todd himself.  Some of the others seemed to have gone
to the lower windows or on to the steps, and were calling up to him
that Falconroy had gone for a stroll down to the Pilgrim's Pond
an hour before, and could not be traced since.  Then Todd cried
`Mighty Murder!' and shut down the window violently; and I could hear him
plunging down the stairs inside.  Repossessing myself of my former
and wiser purpose, I whipped out of the way of the general search
that must follow; and returned here not later than eight o'clock.

     "I now ask you to recall that little Society paragraph
which seemed to you so painfully lacking in interest.  If the convict
was not keeping the shot for Todd, as he evidently wasn't,
it is most likely that he was keeping it for Lord Falconroy;
and it looks as if he had delivered the goods.  No more handy place
to shoot a man than in the curious geological surroundings of that pool,
where a body thrown down would sink through thick slime to a depth
practically unknown.  Let us suppose, then, that our friend
with the cropped hair came to kill Falconroy and not Todd.
But, as I have pointed out, there are many reasons why people in America
might want to kill Todd.  There is no reason why anybody in America
should want to kill an English lord newly landed, except for the one reason
mentioned in the pink paper--that the lord is paying his attentions
to the millionaire's daughter.  Our crop-haired friend,
despite his ill-fitting clothes, must be an aspiring lover.

     "I know the notion will seem to you jarring and even comic;
but that's because you are English.  It sounds to you like saying
the Archbishop of Canterbury's daughter will be married in
St George's, Hanover Square, to a crossing-sweeper on ticket-of-leave.
You don't do justice to the climbing and aspiring power of our
more remarkable citizens.  You see a good-looking grey-haired man
in evening-dress with a sort of authority about him, you know he is
a pillar of the State, and you fancy he had a father.  You are in error.
You do not realize that a comparatively few years ago he may have been
in a tenement or (quite likely) in a jail.  You don't allow for our
national buoyancy and uplift.  Many of our most influential citizens
have not only risen recently, but risen comparatively late in life.
Todd's daughter was fully eighteen when her father first made his pile;
so there isn't really anything impossible in her having a hanger-on
in low life; or even in her hanging on to him, as I think
she must be doing, to judge by the lantern business.  If so,
the hand that held the lantern may not be unconnected with the hand
that held the gun.  This case, sir, will make a noise."

     "Well," said the priest patiently, "and what did you do next?"

     "I reckon you'll be shocked," replied Greywood Usher,
"as I know you don't cotton to the march of science in these matters.
I am given a good deal of discretion here, and perhaps take a little more
than I'm given; and I thought it was an excellent opportunity to test
that Psychometric Machine I told you about.  Now, in my opinion,
that machine can't lie."

     "No machine can lie," said Father Brown; "nor can it tell the truth."

     "It did in this case, as I'll show you," went on Usher positively.
"I sat the man in the ill-fitting clothes in a comfortable chair,
and simply wrote words on a blackboard; and the machine simply
recorded the variations of his pulse; and I simply observed his manner.
The trick is to introduce some word connected with the supposed crime
in a list of words connected with something quite different,
yet a list in which it occurs quite naturally.  Thus I wrote `heron' and
`eagle' and `owl', and when I wrote `falcon' he was tremendously agitated;
and when I began to make an `r' at the end of the word,
that machine just bounded.  Who else in this republic has any reason
to jump at the name of a newly-arrived Englishman like Falconroy
except the man who's shot him?  Isn't that better evidence than
a lot of gabble  from  witnesses--if the evidence of a reliable machine?"

     "You always forget," observed his companion, "that the reliable machine
always has to be worked by an unreliable machine."

     "Why, what do you mean?" asked the detective.

     "I mean Man," said Father Brown, "the most unreliable machine
I know of.  I don't want to be rude; and I don't think you will consider
Man to be an offensive or inaccurate description of yourself.
You say you observed his manner; but how do you know you observed it right?
You say the words have to come in a natural way; but how do you know
that you did it naturally?  How do you know, if you come to that,
that he did not observe your manner?  Who is to prove that you were not
tremendously agitated?  There was no machine tied on to your pulse."

     "I tell you," cried the American in the utmost excitement,
"I was as cool as a cucumber."

     "Criminals also can be as cool as cucumbers," said Brown
with a smile.  "And almost as cool as you."

     "Well, this one wasn't," said Usher, throwing the papers about.
"Oh, you make me tired!"

     "I'm sorry," said the other.  "I only point out what seems
a reasonable possibility.  If you could tell by his manner when
the word that might hang him had come, why shouldn't he tell
from your manner that the word that might hang him was coming?
I should ask for more than words myself before I hanged anybody."

     Usher smote the table and rose in a sort of angry triumph.

     "And that," he cried, "is just what I'm going to give you.
I tried the machine first just in order to test the thing in other ways
afterwards and the machine, sir, is right."

     He paused a moment and resumed with less excitement.
"I rather want to insist, if it comes to that, that so far
I had very little to go on except the scientific experiment.
There was really nothing against the man at all.  His clothes were
ill-fitting, as I've said, but they were rather better, if anything,
than those of the submerged class to which he evidently belonged.
Moreover, under all the stains of his plunging through ploughed fields
or bursting through dusty hedges, the man was comparatively clean.
This might mean, of course, that he had only just broken prison;
but it reminded me more of the desperate decency of the comparatively
respectable poor.  His demeanour was, I am bound to confess,
quite in accordance with theirs.  He was silent and dignified as they are;
he seemed to have a big, but buried, grievance, as they do.
He professed total ignorance of the crime and the whole question;
and showed nothing but a sullen impatience for something sensible
that might come to take him out of his meaningless scrape.
He asked me more than once if he could telephone for a lawyer
who had helped him a long time ago in a trade dispute, and in every sense
acted as you would expect an innocent man to act.  There was nothing
against him in the world except that little finger on the dial
that pointed to the change of his pulse.

     "Then, sir, the machine was on its trial; and the machine was right.
By the time I came with him out of the private room into the vestibule
where all sorts of other people were awaiting examination,
I think he had already more or less made up his mind to clear things up
by something like a confession.  He turned to me and began to say
in a low voice:  `Oh, I can't stick this any more.  If you must know
all about me--'

     "At the same instant one of the poor women sitting on the long bench
stood up, screaming aloud and pointing at him with her finger.
I have never in my life heard anything more demoniacally distinct.
Her lean finger seemed to pick him out as if it were a pea-shooter.
Though the word was a mere howl, every syllable was as clear
as a separate stroke on the clock.

     "`Drugger Davis!' she shouted.  `They've got Drugger Davis!'

     "Among the wretched women, mostly thieves and streetwalkers,
twenty faces were turned, gaping with glee and hate.  If I had never
heard the words, I should have known by the very shock upon his features
that the so-called Oscar Rian had heard his real name.  But I'm not quite
so ignorant, you may be surprised to hear.  Drugger Davis was
one of the most terrible and depraved criminals that ever
baffled our police.  It is certain he had done murder more than once
long before his last exploit with the warder.  But he was never entirely
fixed for it, curiously enough because he did it in the same manner
as those milder--or meaner--crimes for which he was fixed pretty often.
He was a handsome, well-bred-looking brute, as he still is, to some extent;
and he used mostly to go about with barmaids or shop-girls and do them
out of their money.  Very often, though, he went a good deal farther;
and they were found drugged with cigarettes or chocolates and
their whole property missing.  Then came one case where the girl
was found dead; but deliberation could not quite be proved, and,
what was more practical still, the criminal could not be found.
I heard a rumour of his having reappeared somewhere in the opposite
character this time, lending money instead of borrowing it;
but still to such poor widows as he might personally fascinate,
but still with the same bad result for them.  Well, there is
your innocent man, and there is his innocent record.  Even, since then,
four criminals and three warders have identified him and confirmed the story.
Now what have you got to say to my poor little machine after that?
Hasn't the machine done for him?  Or do you prefer to say that the woman
and I have done for him?"

     "As to what you've done for him," replied Father Brown,
rising and shaking himself in a floppy way, "you've saved him from
the electrical chair.  I don't think they can kill Drugger Davis
on that old vague story of the poison; and as for the convict
who killed the warder, I suppose it's obvious that you haven't got him.
Mr Davis is innocent of that crime, at any rate."

     "What do you mean?" demanded the other.  "Why should he be
innocent of that crime?"

     "Why, bless us all!" cried the small man in one of his rare
moments of animation, "why, because he's guilty of the other crimes!
I don't know what you people are made of.  You seem to think that
all sins are kept together in a bag.  You talk as if a miser on Monday
were always a spendthrift on Tuesday.  You tell me this man you have here
spent weeks and months wheedling needy women out of small sums of money;
that he used a drug at the best, and a poison at the worst;
that he turned up afterwards as the lowest kind of moneylender,
and cheated most poor people in the same patient and pacific style.
Let it be granted--let us admit, for the sake of argument,
that he did all this.  If that is so, I will tell you what he didn't do.
He didn't storm a spiked wall against a man with a loaded gun.
He didn't write on the wall with his own hand, to say he had done it.
He didn't stop to state that his justification was self-defence.
He didn't explain that he had no quarrel with the poor warder.
He didn't name the house of the rich man to which he was going with the gun.
He didn't write his own, initials in a man's blood.  Saints alive!
Can't you see the whole character is different, in good and evil?
Why, you don't seem to be like I am a bit.  One would think
you'd never had any vices of your own."

     The amazed American had already parted his lips in protest
when the door of his private and official room was hammered
and rattled in an unceremonious way to which he was totally unaccustomed.

     The door flew open.  The moment before Greywood Usher had been
coming to the conclusion that Father Brown might possibly be mad.
The moment after he began to think he was mad himself.
There burst and fell into his private room a man in the filthiest rags,
with a greasy squash hat still askew on his head, and a shabby green shade
shoved up from one of his eyes, both of which were glaring like a tiger's.
The rest of his face was almost undiscoverable, being masked with
a matted beard and whiskers through which the nose could barely
thrust itself, and further buried in a squalid red scarf or handkerchief.
Mr Usher prided himself on having seen most of the roughest specimens
in the State, but he thought he had never seen such a baboon dressed
as a scarecrow as this.  But, above all, he had never in all his
placid scientific existence heard a man like that speak to him first.

     "See here, old man Usher," shouted the being in the red handkerchief,
"I'm getting tired.  Don't you try any of your hide-and-seek on me;
I don't get fooled any.  Leave go of my guests, and I'll let up
on the fancy clockwork.  Keep him here for a split instant and you'll
feel pretty mean.  I reckon I'm not a man with no pull."

     The eminent Usher was regarding the bellowing monster
with an amazement which had dried up all other sentiments.
The mere shock to his eyes had rendered his ears, almost useless.
At last he rang a bell with a hand of violence.  While the bell was
still strong and pealing, the voice of Father Brown fell soft but distinct.

     "I have a suggestion to make," he said, "but it seems
a little confusing.  I don't know this gentleman--but--
but I think I know him.  Now, you know him--you know him quite well--
but you don't know him--naturally.  Sounds paradoxical, I know."

     "I reckon the Cosmos is cracked," said Usher, and fell asprawl
in his round office chair.

     "Now, see here," vociferated the stranger, striking the table,
but speaking in a voice that was all the more mysterious
because it was comparatively mild and rational though still resounding.
"I won't let you in.  I want--"

     "Who in hell are you?" yelled Usher, suddenly sitting up straight.

     "I think the gentleman's name is Todd," said the priest.

     Then he picked up the pink slip of newspaper.

     "I fear you don't read the Society papers properly," he said,
and began to read out in a monotonous voice, "`Or locked in
the jewelled bosoms of our city's gayest leaders; but there is talk
of a pretty parody of the manners and customs of the other end
of Society's scale.' There's been a big Slum Dinner up at
Pilgrim's Pond tonight; and a man, one of the guests, disappeared.
Mr Ireton Todd is a good host, and has tracked him here,
without even waiting to take off his fancy-dress."

     "What man do you mean?"

     "I mean the man with comically ill-fitting clothes you saw
running across the ploughed field.  Hadn't you better go and
investigate him?  He will be rather impatient to get back to his champagne,
from which he ran away in such a hurry, when the convict with the gun
hove in sight."

     "Do you seriously mean--" began the official.

     "Why, look here, Mr Usher," said Father Brown quietly,
"you said the machine couldn't make a mistake; and in one sense it didn't.
But the other machine did; the machine that worked it.
You assumed that the man in rags jumped at the name of Lord Falconroy,
because he was Lord Falconroy's murderer.  He jumped at the name
of Lord Falconroy because he is Lord Falconroy."

     "Then why the blazes didn't he say so?" demanded the staring Usher.

     "He felt his plight and recent panic were hardly patrician,"
replied the priest, "so he tried to keep the name back at first.
But he was just going to tell it you, when"--and Father Brown looked
down at his boots--"when a woman found another name for him."

     "But you can't be so mad as to say," said Greywood Usher,
very white, "that Lord Falconroy was Drugger Davis."

     The priest looked at him very earnestly, but with a baffling
and undecipherable face.

     "I am not saying anything about it," he said.  "I leave
all the rest to you.  Your pink paper says that the title
was recently revived for him; but those papers are very unreliable.
It says he was in the States in youth; but the whole story seems
very strange.  Davis and Falconroy are both pretty considerable cowards,
but so are lots of other men.  I would not hang a dog on my own opinion
about this.  But I think," he went on softly and reflectively,
"I think you Americans are too modest.  I think you idealize
the English aristocracy--even in assuming it to be so aristocratic.
You see a good-looking Englishman in evening-dress; you know
he's in the House of Lords; and you fancy he has a father.
You don't allow for our national buoyancy and uplift.  Many of our
most influential noblemen have not only risen recently, but--"

     "Oh, stop it!" cried Greywood Usher, wringing one lean hand
in impatience against a shade of irony in the other's face.

     "Don't stay talking to this lunatic!" cried Todd brutally.
"Take me to my friend."

     Next morning Father Brown appeared with the same demure expression,
carrying yet another piece of pink newspaper.

     "I'm afraid you neglect the fashionable press rather," he said,
"but this cutting may interest you."

     Usher read the headlines, "Last-Trick's Strayed Revellers:
Mirthful Incident near Pilgrim's Pond." The paragraph went on:
"A laughable occurrence took place outside Wilkinson's Motor Garage
last night.  A policeman on duty had his attention drawn by larrikins
to a man in prison dress who was stepping with considerable coolness
into the steering-seat of a pretty high-toned Panhard; he was accompanied
by a girl wrapped in a ragged shawl.  On the police interfering,
the young woman threw back the shawl, and all recognized
Millionaire Todd's daughter, who had just come from the Slum Freak Dinner
at the Pond, where all the choicest guests were in a similar deshabille.
She and the gentleman who had donned prison uniform were going for
the customary joy-ride."

     Under the pink slip Mr Usher found a strip of a later paper,
headed, "Astounding Escape of Millionaire's Daughter with Convict.
She had Arranged Freak Dinner.  Now Safe in--"

     Mr Greenwood Usher lifted his eyes, but Father Brown was gone.




VI. The Head of Caesar


THERE is somewhere in Brompton or Kensington an interminable avenue
of tall houses, rich but largely empty, that looks like a terrace of tombs.
The very steps up to the dark front doors seem as steep as
the side of pyramids; one would hesitate to knock at the door,
lest it should be opened by a mummy.  But a yet more depressing feature
in the grey facade is its telescopic length and changeless continuity.
The pilgrim walking down it begins to think he will never come to
a break or a corner; but there is one exception--a very small one,
but hailed by the pilgrim almost with a shout.  There is a sort of mews
between two of the tall mansions, a mere slit like the crack of a door
by comparison with the street, but just large enough to permit
a pigmy ale-house or eating-house, still allowed by the rich to their
stable-servants, to stand in the angle.  There is something cheery in its
very dinginess, and something free and elfin in its very insignificance.
At the feet of those grey stone giants it looks like a lighted house
of dwarfs.

     Anyone passing the place during a certain autumn evening,
itself almost fairylike, might have seen a hand pull aside
the red half-blind which (along with some large white lettering)
half hid the interior from the street, and a face peer out not unlike
a rather innocent goblin's.  It was, in fact, the face of one with
the harmless human name of Brown, formerly priest of Cobhole in Essex,
and now working in London.  His friend, Flambeau, a semi-official
investigator, was sitting opposite him, making his last notes of a case
he had cleared up in the neighbourhood.  They were sitting at a small table,
close up to the window, when the priest pulled the curtain back
and looked out.  He waited till a stranger in the street had
passed the window, to let the curtain fall into its place again.
Then his round eyes rolled to the large white lettering on the window
above his head, and then strayed to the next table, at which sat only
a navvy with beer and cheese, and a young girl with red hair and
a glass of milk.  Then (seeing his friend put away the pocket-book),
he said softly:

     "If you've got ten minutes, I wish you'd follow that man with
the false nose."

     Flambeau looked up in surprise; but the girl with the red hair
also looked up, and with something that was stronger than astonishment.
She was simply and even loosely dressed in light brown sacking stuff;
but she was a lady, and even, on a second glance, a rather needlessly
haughty one.  "The man with the false nose!" repeated Flambeau.
"Who's he?"

     "I haven't a notion," answered Father Brown.  "I want you
to find out; I ask it as a favour.  He went down there"--and he jerked
his thumb over his shoulder in one of his undistinguished gestures--
"and can't have passed three lamp-posts yet.  I only want to know
the direction."

     Flambeau gazed at his friend for some time, with an expression
between perplexity and amusement; and then, rising from the table;
squeezed his huge form out of the little door of the dwarf tavern,
and melted into the twilight.

     Father Brown took a small book out of his pocket and began
to read steadily; he betrayed no consciousness of the fact that
the red-haired lady had left her own table and sat down opposite him.
At last she leaned over and said in a low, strong voice:
"Why do you say that?  How do you know it's false?"

     He lifted his rather heavy eyelids, which fluttered in
considerable embarrassment.  Then his dubious eye roamed again to
the white lettering on the glass front of the public-house.
The young woman's eyes followed his, and rested there also,
but in pure puzzledom.

     "No," said Father Brown, answering her thoughts.  "It doesn't say
`Sela', like the thing in the Psalms; I read it like that myself when
I was wool-gathering just now; it says `Ales.'"

     "Well?" inquired the staring young lady.  "What does it matter
what it says?"

     His ruminating eye roved to the girl's light canvas sleeve,
round the wrist of which ran a very slight thread of artistic pattern,
just enough to distinguish it from a working-dress of a common woman
and make it more like the working-dress of a lady art-student.
He seemed to find much food for thought in this; but his reply was
very slow and hesitant.  "You see, madam," he said, "from outside
the place looks--well, it is a perfectly decent place--but ladies
like you don't--don't generally think so.  They never go into such places
from choice, except--"

     "Well?" she repeated.

     "Except an unfortunate few who don't go in to drink milk."

     "You are a most singular person," said the young lady.
"What is your object in all this?"

     "Not to trouble you about it," he replied, very gently.
"Only to arm myself with knowledge enough to help you, if ever
you freely ask my help."

     "But why should I need help?"

     He continued his dreamy monologue.  "You couldn't have come in
to see protegees, humble friends, that sort of thing, or you'd have
gone through into the parlour...and you couldn't have come in because
you were ill, or you'd have spoken to the woman of the place,
who's obviously respectable...besides, you don't look ill in that way,
but only unhappy....  This street is the only original long lane
that has no turning; and the houses on both sides are shut up....
I could only suppose that you'd seen somebody coming whom you didn't want
to meet; and found the public-house was the only shelter in this
wilderness of stone....  I don't think I went beyond the licence of
a stranger in glancing at the only man who passed immediately after....
And as I thought he looked like the wrong sort...and you looked like
the right sort....  I held myself ready to help if he annoyed you;
that is all.  As for my friend, he'll be back soon; and he certainly
can't find out anything by stumping down a road like this....
I didn't think he could."

     "Then why did you send him out?" she cried, leaning forward with
yet warmer curiosity.  She had the proud, impetuous face that goes
with reddish colouring, and a Roman nose, as it did in Marie Antoinette.

     He looked at her steadily for the first time, and said:
"Because I hoped you would speak to me."

     She looked back at him for some time with a heated face,
in which there hung a red shadow of anger; then, despite her anxieties,
humour broke out of her eyes and the corners of her mouth,
and she answered almost grimly:  "Well, if you're so keen on
my conversation, perhaps you'll answer my question."  After a pause
she added:  "I had the honour to ask you why you thought the man's nose
was false."

     "The wax always spots like that just a little in this weather,"
answered Father Brown with entire simplicity,

     "But it's such a crooked nose," remonstrated the red-haired girl.

     The priest smiled in his turn.  "I don't say it's the sort of nose
one would wear out of mere foppery," he admitted.  "This man, I think,
wears it because his real nose is so much nicer."

     "But why?" she insisted.

     "What is the nursery-rhyme?" observed Brown absent-mindedly.
"There was a crooked man and he went a crooked mile....  That man,
I fancy, has gone a very crooked road--by following his nose."

     "Why, what's he done?" she demanded, rather shakily.

     "I don't want to force your confidence by a hair," said Father Brown,
very quietly.  "But I think you could tell me more about that than
I can tell you."

     The girl sprang to her feet and stood quite quietly, but with
clenched hands, like one about to stride away; then her hands
loosened slowly, and she sat down again.  "You are more of a mystery
than all the others," she said desperately, "but I feel there might be
a heart in your mystery."

     "What we all dread most," said the priest in a low voice,
"is a maze with no centre.  That is why atheism is only a nightmare."
"I will tell you everything," said the red-haired girl doggedly,
"except why I am telling you; and that I don't know."

     She picked at the darned table-cloth and went on:  "You look as if
you knew what isn't snobbery as well as what is; and when I say that
ours is a good old family, you'll understand it is a necessary part of
the story; indeed, my chief danger is in my brother's high-and-dry notions,
noblesse oblige and all that.  Well, my name is Christabel Carstairs;
and my father was that Colonel Carstairs you've probably heard of,
who made the famous Carstairs Collection of Roman coins.
I could never describe my father to you; the nearest I can say is
that he was very like a Roman coin himself.  He was as handsome and
as genuine and as valuable and as metallic and as out-of-date.
He was prouder of his Collection than of his coat-of-arms--
nobody could say more than that.  His extraordinary character
came out most in his will.  He had two sons and one daughter.
He quarrelled with one son, my brother Giles, and sent him
to Australia on a small allowance.  He then made a will leaving
the Carstairs Collection, actually with a yet smaller allowance,
to my brother Arthur.  He meant it as a reward, as the highest honour
he could offer, in acknowledgement of Arthur's loyalty and rectitude
and the distinctions he had already gained in mathematics and economics
at Cambridge.  He left me practically all his pretty large fortune;
and I am sure he meant it in contempt.

     "Arthur, you may say, might well complain of this; but Arthur
is my father over again.  Though he had some differences with my
father in early youth, no sooner had he taken over the Collection
than he became like a pagan priest dedicated to a temple.
He mixed up these Roman halfpence with the honour of the Carstairs
family in the same stiff, idolatrous way as his father before him.
He acted as if Roman money must be guarded by all the Roman virtues.
He took no pleasures; he spent nothing on himself; he lived for
the Collection.  Often he would not trouble to dress for his simple meals;
but pattered about among the corded brown-paper parcels (which no one else
was allowed to touch) in an old brown dressing-gown.  With its rope
and tassel and his pale, thin, refined face, it made him look like
an old ascetic monk.  Every now and then, though, he would appear
dressed like a decidedly fashionable gentleman; but that was only when
he went up to the London sales or shops to make an addition to
the Carstairs Collection.

     "Now, if you've known any young people, you won't be shocked
if I say that I got into rather a low frame of mind with all this;
the frame of mind in which one begins to say that the Ancient Romans
were all very well in their way.  I'm not like my brother Arthur;
I can't help enjoying enjoyment.  I got a lot of romance and rubbish
where I got my red hair, from the other side of the family.
Poor Giles was the same; and I think the atmosphere of coins
might count in excuse for him; though he really did wrong and nearly
went to prison.  But he didn't behave any worse than I did;
as you shall hear.

     "I come now to the silly part of the story.  I think a man
as clever as you can guess the sort of thing that would begin
to relieve the monotony for an unruly girl of seventeen placed in such
a position.  But I am so rattled with more dreadful things that I can
hardly read my own feeling; and don't know whether I despise it now
as a flirtation or bear it as a broken heart.  We lived then at
a little seaside watering-place in South Wales, and a retired sea-captain
living a few doors off had a son about five years older than myself,
who had been a friend of Giles before he went to the Colonies.
His name does not affect my tale; but I tell you it was Philip Hawker,
because I am telling you everything.  We used to go shrimping together,
and said and thought we were in love with each other; at least
he certainly said he was, and I certainly thought I was.
If I tell you he had bronzed curly hair and a falconish sort of face,
bronzed by the sea also, it's not for his sake, I assure you,
but for the story; for it was the cause of a very curious coincidence.

     "One summer afternoon, when I had promised to go shrimping
along the sands with Philip, I was waiting rather impatiently
in the front drawing-room, watching Arthur handle some packets of coins
he had just purchased and slowly shunt them, one or two at a time,
into his own dark study and museum which was at the back of the house.
As soon as I heard the heavy door close on him finally, I made a bolt
for my shrimping-net and tam-o'-shanter and was just going to slip out,
when I saw that my brother had left behind him one coin that lay
gleaming on the long bench by the window.  It was a bronze coin,
and the colour, combined with the exact curve of the Roman nose
and something in the very lift of the long, wiry neck, made the head
of Caesar on it the almost precise portrait of Philip Hawker.
Then I suddenly remembered Giles telling Philip of a coin that was
like him, and Philip wishing he had it.  Perhaps you can fancy the wild,
foolish thoughts with which my head went round; I felt as if I had
had a gift from the fairies.  It seemed to me that if I could only
run away with this, and give it to Philip like a wild sort of wedding-ring,
it would be a bond between us for ever; I felt a thousand such things
at once.  Then there yawned under me, like the pit, the enormous,
awful notion of what I was doing; above all, the unbearable thought,
which was like touching hot iron, of what Arthur would think of it.
A Carstairs a thief; and a thief of the Carstairs treasure!
I believe my brother could see me burned like a witch for such a thing,
But then, the very thought of such fanatical cruelty heightened
my old hatred of his dingy old antiquarian fussiness and my longing
for the youth and liberty that called to me from the sea.
Outside was strong sunlight with a wind; and a yellow head of some
broom or gorse in the garden rapped against the glass of the window.
I thought of that living and growing gold calling to me from all
the heaths of the world--and then of that dead, dull gold and bronze
and brass of my brother's growing dustier and dustier as life went by.
Nature and the Carstairs Collection had come to grips at last.

     "Nature is older than the Carstairs Collection.  As I ran
down the streets to the sea, the coin clenched tight in my fist,
I felt all the Roman Empire on my back as well as the Carstairs pedigree.
It was not only the old lion argent that was roaring in my ear,
but all the eagles of the Caesars seemed flapping and screaming
in pursuit of me.  And yet my heart rose higher and higher like
a child's kite, until I came over the loose, dry sand-hills and to
the flat, wet sands, where Philip stood already up to his ankles
in the shallow shining water, some hundred yards out to sea.
There was a great red sunset; and the long stretch of low water,
hardly rising over the ankle for half a mile, was like a lake
of ruby flame.  It was not till I had torn off my shoes and stockings
and waded to where he stood, which was well away from the dry land,
that I turned and looked round.  We were quite alone in a circle
of sea-water and wet sand, and I gave him the head of Caesar.

     "At the very instant I had a shock of fancy:  that a man far away
on the sand-hills was looking at me intently.  I must have felt
immediately after that it was a mere leap of unreasonable nerves;
for the man was only a dark dot in the distance, and I could only just see
that he was standing quite still and gazing, with his head a little
on one side.  There was no earthly logical evidence that he was
looking at me; he might have been looking at a ship, or the sunset,
or the sea-gulls, or at any of the people who still strayed here and there
on the shore between us.  Nevertheless, whatever my start sprang from
was prophetic; for, as I gazed, he started walking briskly in a bee-line
towards us across the wide wet sands.  As he drew nearer and nearer
I saw that he was dark and bearded, and that his eyes were marked with
dark spectacles.  He was dressed poorly but respectably in black,
from the old black top hat on his head to the solid black boots
on his feet.  In spite of these he walked straight into the sea
without a flash of hesitation, and came on at me with the steadiness
of a travelling bullet.

     "I can't tell you the sense of monstrosity and miracle I had
when he thus silently burst the barrier between land and water.
It was as if he had walked straight off a cliff and still marched
steadily in mid-air.  It was as if a house had flown up into the sky
or a man's head had fallen off.  He was only wetting his boots;
but he seemed to be a demon disregarding a law of Nature.  If he had
hesitated an instant at the water's edge it would have been nothing.
As it was, he seemed to look so much at me alone as not to notice the ocean.
Philip was some yards away with his back to me, bending over his net.
The stranger came on till he stood within two yards of me, the water
washing half-way up to his knees.  Then he said, with a clearly modulated
and rather mincing articulation:  `Would it discommode you to contribute
elsewhere a coin with a somewhat different superscription?'

     "With one exception there was nothing definably abnormal about him.
His tinted glasses were not really opaque, but of a blue kind common enough,
nor were the eyes behind them shifty, but regarded me steadily.
His dark beard was not really long or wild--, but he looked rather hairy,
because the beard began very high up in his face, just under
the cheek-bones.  His complexion was neither sallow nor livid,
but on the contrary rather clear and youthful; yet this gave
a pink-and-white wax look which somehow (I don't know why) rather
increased the horror.  The only oddity one could fix was that his nose,
which was otherwise of a good shape, was just slightly turned sideways
at the tip; as if, when it was soft, it had been tapped on one side
with a toy hammer.  The thing was hardly a deformity; yet I cannot
tell you what a living nightmare it was to me.  As he stood there
in the sunset-stained water he affected me as some hellish sea-monster
just risen roaring out of a sea like blood.  I don't know why
a touch on the nose should affect my imagination so much.
I think it seemed as if he could move his nose like a finger.
And as if he had just that moment moved it.

     "`Any little assistance,' he continued with the same queer,
priggish accent, `that may obviate the necessity of my communicating
with the family.'

     "Then it rushed over me that I was being blackmailed for
the theft of the bronze piece; and all my merely superstitious fears
and doubts were swallowed up in one overpowering, practical question.
How could he have found out?  I had stolen the thing suddenly and on impulse;
I was certainly alone; for I always made sure of being unobserved
when I slipped out to see Philip in this way.  I had not,
to all appearance, been followed in the street; and if I had,
they could not `X-ray' the coin in my closed hand.  The man standing
on the sand-hills could no more have seen what I gave Philip than
shoot a fly in one eye, like the man in the fairy-tale.

     "`Philip,' I cried helplessly, `ask this man what he wants.'

     "When Philip lifted his head at last from mending his net
he looked rather red, as if sulky or ashamed; but it may have been
only the exertion of stooping and the red evening light; I may have
only had another of the morbid fancies that seemed to be dancing about me.
He merely said gruffly to the man: `You clear out of this.'
And, motioning me to follow, set off wading shoreward without paying
further attention to him.  He stepped on to a stone breakwater that
ran out from among the roots of the sand-hills, and so struck homeward,
perhaps thinking our incubus would find it less easy to walk on such
rough stones, green and slippery with seaweed, than we, who were young
and used to it.  But my persecutor walked as daintily as he talked;
and he still followed me, picking his way and picking his phrases.
I heard his delicate, detestable voice appealing to me over my shoulder,
until at last, when we had crested the sand-hills, Philip's patience
(which was by no means so conspicuous on most occasions) seemed to snap.
He turned suddenly, saying, `Go back.  I can't talk to you now.'
And as the man hovered and opened his mouth, Philip struck him a buffet
on it that sent him flying from the top of the tallest sand-hill
to the bottom.  I saw him crawling out below, covered with sand.

     "This stroke comforted me somehow, though it might well increase
my peril; but Philip showed none of his usual elation at his own prowess.
Though as affectionate as ever, he still seemed cast down; and before
I could ask him anything fully, he parted with me at his own gate,
with two remarks that struck me as strange.  He said that,
all things considered, I ought to put the coin back in the Collection;
but that he himself would keep it `for the present'.  And then he added
quite suddenly and irrelevantly:, `You know Giles is back from Australia?'"

     The door of the tavern opened and the gigantic shadow of
the investigator Flambeau fell across the table.  Father Brown
presented him to the lady in his own slight, persuasive style of speech,
mentioning his knowledge and sympathy in such cases; and almost
without knowing, the girl was soon reiterating her story to two listeners.
But Flambeau, as he bowed and sat down, handed the priest a small slip
of paper.  Brown accepted it with some surprise and read on it:
"Cab to Wagga Wagga, 379, Mafeking Avenue, Putney." The girl was going
on with her story.

     "I went up the steep street to my own house with my head in a whirl;
it had not begun to clear when I came to the doorstep, on which
I found a milk-can--and the man with the twisted nose.  The milk-can
told me the servants were all out; for, of course, Arthur,
browsing about in his brown dressing-gown in a brown study,
would not hear or answer a bell.  Thus there was no one to help me
in the house, except my brother, whose help must be my ruin.
In desperation I thrust two shillings into the horrid thing's hand,
and told him to call again in a few days, when I had thought it out.
He went off sulking, but more sheepishly than I had expected--
perhaps he had been shaken by his fall--and I watched the star of sand
splashed on his back receding down the road with a horrid vindictive
pleasure.  He turned a corner some six houses down.

     "Then I let myself in, made myself some tea, and tried to
think it out.  I sat at the drawing-room window looking on to the garden,
which still glowed with the last full evening light.  But I was too
distracted and dreamy to look at the lawns and flower-pots and flower-beds
with any concentration.  So I took the shock the more sharply because
I'd seen it so slowly.

     "The man or monster I'd sent away was standing quite still
in the middle of the garden.  Oh, we've all read a lot about
pale-faced phantoms in the dark; but this was more dreadful
than anything of that kind could ever be.  Because, though he cast
a long evening shadow, he still stood in warm sunlight.  And because
his face was not pale, but had that waxen bloom still upon it
that belongs to a barber's dummy.  He stood quite still, with his face
towards me; and I can't tell you how horrid he looked among the tulips
and all those tall, gaudy, almost hothouse-looking flowers.
It looked as if we'd stuck up a waxwork instead of a statue in
the centre of our garden.

     "Yet almost the instant he saw me move in the window he turned
and ran out of the garden by the back gate, which stood open and
by which he had undoubtedly entered.  This renewed timidity on his part
was so different from the impudence with which he had walked into the sea,
that I felt vaguely comforted.  I fancied, perhaps, that he feared
confronting Arthur more than I knew.  Anyhow, I settled down at last,
and had a quiet dinner alone (for it was against the rules to
disturb Arthur when he was rearranging the museum), and, my thoughts,
a little released, fled to Philip and lost themselves, I suppose.
Anyhow, I was looking blankly, but rather pleasantly than otherwise,
at another window, uncurtained, but by this time black as a slate
with the final night-fall.  It seemed to me that something like a snail
was on the outside of the window-pane.  But when I stared harder,
it was more like a man's thumb pressed on the pane; it had that curled look
that a thumb has.  With my fear and courage re-awakened together,
I rushed at the window and then recoiled with a strangled scream
that any man but Arthur must have heard.

     "For it was not a thumb, any more than it was a snail.
It was the tip of a crooked nose, crushed against the glass;
it looked white with the pressure; and the staring face and eyes
behind it were at first invisible and afterwards grey like a ghost.
I slammed the shutters together somehow, rushed up to my room and
locked myself in.  But, even as I passed, I could swear I saw
a second black window with something on it that was like a snail.

     "It might be best to go to Arthur after all.  If the thing
was crawling close all around the house like a cat, it might have
purposes worse even than blackmail.  My brother might cast me out
and curse me for ever, but he was a gentleman, and would defend me
on the spot.  After ten minutes' curious thinking, I went down,
knocked on the door and then went in:  to see the last and worst sight.

     "My brother's chair was empty, and he was obviously out.
But the man with the crooked nose was sitting waiting for his return,
with his hat still insolently on his head, and actually reading
one of my brother's books under my brother's lamp.  His face was composed
and occupied, but his nose-tip still had the air of being the most mobile
part of his face, as if it had just turned from left to right like
an elephant's proboscis.  I had thought him poisonous enough while
he was pursuing and watching me; but I think his unconsciousness
of my presence was more frightful still.

     "I think I screamed loud and long; but that doesn't matter.
What I did next does matter:  I gave him all the money I had,
including a good deal in paper which, though it was mine, I dare say
I had no right to touch.  He went off at last, with hateful,
tactful regrets all in long words; and I sat down, feeling ruined
in every sense.  And yet I was saved that very night by a pure accident.
Arthur had gone off suddenly to London, as he so often did, for bargains;
and returned, late but radiant, having nearly secured a treasure
that was an added splendour even to the family Collection.
He was so resplendent that I was almost emboldened to confess
the abstraction of the lesser gem--, but he bore down all other topics
with his over-powering projects.  Because the bargain might still
misfire any moment, he insisted on my packing at once and going up
with him to lodgings he had already taken in Fulham, to be near
the curio-shop in question.  Thus in spite of myself, I fled from my foe
almost in the dead of night--but from Philip also....  My brother
was often at the South Kensington Museum, and, in order to make
some sort of secondary life for myself, I paid for a few lessons
at the Art Schools.  I was coming back from them this evening,
when I saw the abomination of desolation walking alive down
the long straight street and the rest is as this gentleman has said.

     "I've got only one thing to say.  I don't deserve to be helped;
and I don't question or complain of my punishment; it is just,
it ought to have happened.  But I still question, with bursting brains,
how it can have happened.  Am I punished by miracle? or how can anyone but
Philip and myself know I gave him a tiny coin in the middle of the sea?"

     "It is an extraordinary problem," admitted Flambeau.

     "Not so extraordinary as the answer," remarked Father Brown
rather gloomily.  "Miss Carstairs, will you be at home if we call
at your Fulham place in an hour and a half hence?"

     The girl looked at him, and then rose and put her gloves on.
"Yes," she said, "I'll be there"; and almost instantly left the place.

     That night the detective and the priest were still talking
of the matter as they drew near the Fulham house, a tenement
strangely mean even for a temporary residence of the Carstairs family.

     "Of course the superficial, on reflection," said Flambeau,
"would think first of this Australian brother who's been
in trouble before, who's come back so suddenly and who's just the man
to have shabby confederates.  But I can't see how he can
come into the thing by any process of thought, unless..."

     "Well?" asked his companion patiently.

     Flambeau lowered his voice.  "Unless the girl's lover comes in,
too, and he would be the blacker villain.  The Australian chap
did know that Hawker wanted the coin.  But I can't see how on earth
he could know that Hawker had got it, unless Hawker signalled to him
or his representative across the shore."

     "That is true," assented the priest, with respect.

     "Have you noted another thing?" went on Flambeau eagerly.
"this Hawker hears his love insulted, but doesn't strike till he's got
to the soft sand-hills, where he can be victor in a mere sham-fight.
If he'd struck amid rocks and sea, he might have hurt his ally."

     "That is true again," said Father Brown, nodding.

     "And now, take it from the start.  It lies between few people,
but at least three.  You want one person for suicide; two people
for murder; but at least three people for blackmail"

     "Why?" asked the priest softly.

     "Well, obviously," cried his friend, "there must be one to be exposed;
one to threaten exposure; and one at least whom exposure would horrify."

     After a long ruminant pause, the priest said:  "You miss a logical step.
Three persons are needed as ideas.  Only two are needed as agents."

     "What can you mean?" asked the other.

     "Why shouldn't a blackmailer," asked Brown, in a low voice,
"threaten his victim with himself?  Suppose a wife became
a rigid teetotaller in order to frighten her husband into concealing
his pub-frequenting, and then wrote him blackmailing letters
in another hand, threatening to tell his wife!  Why shouldn't it work?
Suppose a father forbade a son to gamble and then, following him
in a good disguise, threatened the boy with his own sham
paternal strictness!  Suppose--but, here we are, my friend."

     "My God!" cried Flambeau; "you don't mean--"

     An active figure ran down the steps of the house and showed
under the golden lamplight the unmistakable head that resembled
the Roman coin.  "Miss Carstairs," said Hawker without ceremony,
"wouldn't go in till you came."

     "Well," observed Brown confidently, "don't you think it's
the best thing she can do to stop outside--with you to look after her?
You see, I rather guess you have guessed it all yourself."

     "Yes," said the young man, in an undertone, "I guessed
on the sands and now I know; that was why I let him fall soft."

     Taking a latchkey from the girl and the coin from Hawker,
Flambeau let himself and his friend into the empty house and passed
into the outer parlour.  It was empty of all occupants but one.
The man whom Father Brown had seen pass the tavern was standing
against the wall as if at bay; unchanged, save that he had taken off
his black coat and was wearing a brown dressing-gown.

     "We have come," said Father Brown politely, "to give back
this coin to its owner."  And he handed it to the man with the nose.

     Flambeau's eyes rolled.  "Is this man a coin-collector?" he asked.

     "This man is Mr Arthur Carstairs," said the priest positively,
"and he is a coin-collector of a somewhat singular kind."

     The man changed colour so horribly that the crooked nose
stood out on his face like a separate and comic thing.  He spoke,
nevertheless, with a sort of despairing dignity.  "You shall see,
then," he said, "that I have not lost all the family qualities."
And he turned suddenly and strode into an inner room, slamming the door.

     "Stop him!" shouted Father Brown, bounding and half falling
over a chair; and, after a wrench or two, Flambeau had the door open.
But it was too late.  In dead silence Flambeau strode across
and telephoned for doctor and police.

     An empty medicine bottle lay on the floor.  Across the table
the body of the man in the brown dressing-gown lay amid his burst
and gaping brown-paper parcels; out of which poured and rolled,
not Roman, but very modern English coins.

     The priest held up the bronze head of Caesar.  "This," he said,
"was all that was left of the Carstairs Collection."

     After a silence he went on, with more than common gentleness:
"It was a cruel will his wicked father made, and you see he did
resent it a little.  He hated the Roman money he had, and grew fonder
of the real money denied him.  He not only sold the Collection
bit by bit, but sank bit by bit to the basest ways of making money--
even to blackmailing his own family in a disguise.  He blackmailed
his brother from Australia for his little forgotten crime (that is why
he took the cab to Wagga Wagga in Putney), he blackmailed his sister
for the theft he alone could have noticed.  And that, by the way,
is why she had that supernatural guess when he was away on the sand-dunes.
Mere figure and gait, however distant, are more likely to remind us
of somebody than a well-made-up face quite close."

     There was another silence.  "Well," growled the detective,
"and so this great numismatist and coin-collector was nothing but
a vulgar miser."

     "Is there so great a difference?" asked Father Brown, in the same
strange, indulgent tone.  "What is there wrong about a miser that is
not often as wrong about a collector?  What is wrong, except...
thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image; thou shalt not
bow down to them nor serve them, for I...but we must go and see how
the poor young people are getting on."

     "I think," said Flambeau, "that in spite of everything,
they are probably getting on very well."




VII. The Purple Wig


MR EDWARD NUTT, the industrious editor of the Daily Reformer,
sat at his desk, opening letters and marking proofs to the merry tune
of a typewriter, worked by a vigorous young lady.

     He was a stoutish, fair man, in his shirt-sleeves; his movements
were resolute, his mouth firm and his tones final; but his round,
rather babyish blue eyes had a bewildered and even wistful look
that rather contradicted all this.  Nor indeed was the expression
altogether misleading.  It might truly be said of him, as for many
journalists in authority, that his most familiar emotion was one of
continuous fear; fear of libel actions, fear of lost advertisements,
fear of misprints, fear of the sack.

     His life was a series of distracted compromises between
the proprietor of the paper (and of him), who was a senile soap-boiler
with three ineradicable mistakes in his mind, and the very able staff
he had collected to run the paper; some of whom were brilliant
and experienced men and (what was even worse) sincere enthusiasts
for the political policy of the paper.

     A letter from one of these lay immediately before him,
and rapid and resolute as he was, he seemed almost to hesitate
before opening it.  He took up a strip of proof instead, ran down it
with a blue eye, and a blue pencil, altered the word "adultery"
to the word "impropriety," and the word "Jew" to the word "Alien,"
rang a bell and sent it flying upstairs.

     Then, with a more thoughtful eye, he ripped open the letter from his
more distinguished contributor, which bore a postmark of Devonshire,
and read as follows:

     DEAR NUTT,--As I see you're working Spooks and Dooks at the same time,
what about an article on that rum business of the Eyres of Exmoor;
or as the old women call it down here, the Devil's Ear of Eyre?
The head of the family, you know, is the Duke of Exmoor; he is one of
the few really stiff old Tory aristocrats left, a sound old crusted tyrant
it is quite in our line to make trouble about.  And I think I'm
on the track of a story that will make trouble.

     Of course I don't believe in the old legend about James I;
and as for you, you don't believe in anything, not even in journalism.
The legend, you'll probably remember, was about the blackest business
in English history--the poisoning of Overbury by that witch's cat
Frances Howard, and the quite mysterious terror which forced the King
to pardon the murderers.  There was a lot of alleged witchcraft
mixed up with it; and the story goes that a man-servant listening
at the keyhole heard the truth in a talk between the King and Carr;
and the bodily ear with which he heard grew large and monstrous
as by magic, so awful was the secret.  And though he had to be loaded
with lands and gold and made an ancestor of dukes, the elf-shaped ear
is still recurrent in the family.  Well, you don't believe in black magic;
and if you did, you couldn't use it for copy.  If a miracle happened
in your office, you'd have to hush it up, now so many bishops
are agnostics.  But that is not the point The point is that
there really is something queer about Exmoor and his family;
something quite natural, I dare say, but quite abnormal.
And the Ear is in it somehow, I fancy; either a symbol or a delusion
or disease or something.  Another tradition says that Cavaliers
just after James I began to wear their hair long only to cover
the ear of the first Lord Exmoor.  This also is no doubt fanciful.

     The reason I point it out to you is this:  It seems to me that
we make a mistake in attacking aristocracy entirely for its champagne
and diamonds.  Most men rather admire the nobs for having a good time,
but I think we surrender too much when we admit that aristocracy
has made even the aristocrats happy.  I suggest a series of articles
pointing out how dreary, how inhuman, how downright diabolist,
is the very smell and atmosphere of some of these great houses.
There are plenty of instances; but you couldn't begin with a better one
than the Ear of the Eyres.  By the end of the week I think I can
get you the truth about it.--Yours ever, FRANCIS FINN.

     Mr Nutt reflected a moment, staring at his left boot;
then he called out in a strong, loud and entirely lifeless voice,
in which every syllable sounded alike:  "Miss Barlow, take down
a letter to Mr Finn, please."

     DEAR FINN,--I think it would do; copy should reach us second post
Saturday.--Yours, E. NUTT.

     This elaborate epistle he articulated as if it were all one word;
and Miss Barlow rattled it down as if it were all one word.
Then he took up another strip of proof and a blue pencil,
and altered the word "supernatural" to the word "marvellous",
and the expression "shoot down" to the expression "repress".

     In such happy, healthful activities did Mr Nutt disport himself,
until the ensuing Saturday found him at the same desk, dictating to
the same typist, and using the same blue pencil on the first instalment
of Mr Finn's revelations.  The opening was a sound piece of slashing
invective about the evil secrets of princes, and despair in the high places
of the earth.  Though written violently, it was in excellent English;
but the editor, as usual, had given to somebody else the task
of breaking it up into sub-headings, which were of a spicier sort,
as "Peeress and Poisons", and "The Eerie Ear", "The Eyres in their Eyrie",
and so on through a hundred happy changes.  Then followed the legend
of the Ear, amplified from Finn's first letter, and then the substance
of his later discoveries, as follows:


     I know it is the practice of journalists to put the end of the story
at the beginning and call it a headline.  I know that journalism
largely consists in saying "Lord Jones Dead" to people who never knew
that Lord Jones was alive.  Your present correspondent thinks that this,
like many other journalistic customs, is bad journalism; and that
the Daily Reformer has to set a better example in such things.
He proposes to tell his story as it occurred, step by step.
He will use the real names of the parties, who in most cases are ready
to confirm his testimony.   As for the headlines, the sensational
proclamations--they will come at the end.

     I was walking along a public path that threads through
a private Devonshire orchard and seems to point towards Devonshire cider,
when I came suddenly upon just such a place as the path suggested.
It was a long, low inn, consisting really of a cottage and two barns;
thatched all over with the thatch that looks like brown and grey hair
grown before history.  But outside the door was a sign which
called it the Blue Dragon; and under the sign was one of those long
rustic tables that used to stand outside most of the free English inns,
before teetotallers and brewers between them destroyed freedom.
And at this table sat three gentlemen, who might have lived
a hundred years ago.

     Now that I know them all better, there is no difficulty
about disentangling the impressions; but just then they looked like
three very solid ghosts.  The dominant figure, both because he was
bigger in all three dimensions, and because he sat centrally
in the length of the table, facing me, was a tall, fat man dressed
completely in black, with a rubicund, even apoplectic visage,
but a rather bald and rather bothered brow.  Looking at him again,
more strictly, I could not exactly say what it was that gave me
the sense of antiquity, except the antique cut of his white
clerical necktie and the barred wrinkles across his brow.

     It was even less easy to fix the impression in the case of
the man at the right end of the table, who, to say truth,
was as commonplace a person as could be seen anywhere, with a round,
brown-haired head and a round snub nose, but also clad in clerical black,
of a stricter cut.  It was only when I saw his broad curved hat lying
on the table beside him that I realized why I connected him with
anything ancient.  He was a Roman Catholic priest.

     Perhaps the third man, at the other end of the table,
had really more to do with it than the rest, though he was both
slighter in physical presence and more inconsiderate in his dress.
His lank limbs were clad, I might also say clutched, in very tight
grey sleeves and pantaloons; he had a long, sallow, aquiline face
which seemed somehow all the more saturnine because his lantern jaws
were imprisoned in his collar and neck-cloth more in the style of
the old stock; and his hair (which ought to have been dark brown)
was of an odd dim, russet colour which, in conjunction with
his yellow face, looked rather purple than red.  The unobtrusive
yet unusual colour was all the more notable because his hair was
almost unnaturally healthy and curling, and he wore it full.
But, after all analysis, I incline to think that what gave me
my first old-fashioned impression was simply a set of tall,
old-fashioned wine-glasses, one or two lemons and two churchwarden pipes.
And also, perhaps, the old-world errand on which I had come.

     Being a hardened reporter, and it being apparently a public inn,
I did not need to summon much of my impudence to sit down at
the long table and order some cider.  The big man in black seemed
very learned, especially about local antiquities; the small man in black,
though he talked much less, surprised me with a yet wider culture.
So we got on very well together; but the third man, the old gentleman
in the tight pantaloons, seemed rather distant and haughty,
until I slid into the subject of the Duke of Exmoor and his ancestry.

     I thought the subject seemed to embarrass the other two a little;
but it broke the spell of the third man's silence most successfully.
Speaking with restraint and with the accent of a highly educated gentleman,
and puffing at intervals at his long churchwarden pipe, he proceeded
to tell me some of the most horrible stories I have ever heard in my life:
how one of the Eyres in the former ages had hanged his own father;
and another had his wife scourged at the cart tail through the village;
and another had set fire to a church full of children, and so on.

     Some of the tales, indeed, are not fit for public print--,
such as the story of the Scarlet Nuns, the abominable story of
the Spotted Dog, or the thing that was done in the quarry.
And all this red roll of impieties came from his thin, genteel lips
rather primly than otherwise, as he sat sipping the wine out of
his tall, thin glass.

     I could see that the big man opposite me was trying,
if anything, to stop him; but he evidently held the old gentleman
in considerable respect, and could not venture to do so at all abruptly.
And the little priest at the other end of the-table, though free from
any such air of embarrassment, looked steadily at the table,
and seemed to listen to the recital with great pain--as well as he might.

     "You don't seem," I said to the narrator, "to be very fond of
the Exmoor pedigree."

     He looked at me a moment, his lips still prim, but whitening
and tightening; then he deliberately broke his long pipe and glass
on the table and stood up, the very picture of a perfect gentleman
with the framing temper of a fiend.

     "These gentlemen," he said, "will tell you whether I have cause
to like it.  The curse of the Eyres of old has lain heavy on this country,
and many have suffered from it.  They know there are none who have
suffered from it as I have."  And with that he crushed a piece of
the fallen glass under his heel, and strode away among the green twilight
of the twinkling apple-trees.

     "That is an extraordinary old gentleman," I said to the other two;
"do you happen to know what the Exmoor family has done to him?  Who is he?"

     The big man in black was staring at me with the wild air of
a baffled bull; he did not at first seem to take it in.  Then he said
at last, "Don't you know who he is?"

     I reaffirmed my ignorance, and there was another silence;
then the little priest said, still looking at the table, "That is
the Duke of Exmoor."

     Then, before I could collect my scattered senses, he added
equally quietly, but with an air of regularizing things:
"My friend here is Doctor Mull, the Duke's librarian.  My name is Brown."

     "But," I stammered, "if that is the Duke, why does he damn all
the old dukes like that?"

     "He seems really to believe," answered the priest called Brown,
"that they have left a curse on him." Then he added, with some irrelevance,
"That's why he wears a wig."

     It was a few moments before his meaning dawned on me.
"You don't mean that fable about the fantastic ear?" I demanded.
"I've heard of it, of course, but surely it must be a superstitious yarn
spun out of something much simpler.  I've sometimes thought it was
a wild version of one of those mutilation stories.  They used to crop
criminals' ears in the sixteenth century."

     "I hardly think it was that," answered the little man thoughtfully,
"but it is not outside ordinary science or natural law for a family
to have some deformity frequently reappearing--such as one ear bigger
than the other."

     The big librarian had buried his big bald brow in his big red hands,
like a man trying to think out his duty.  "No," he groaned.
"You do the man a wrong after all.  Understand, I've no reason
to defend him, or even keep faith with him.  He has been a tyrant to me
as to everybody else.  Don't fancy because you see him sitting here
that he isn't a great lord in the worst sense of the word.
He would fetch a man a mile to ring a bell a yard off--if it would
summon another man three miles to fetch a matchbox three yards off.
He must have a footman to carry his walking-stick; a body servant
to hold up his opera-glasses--"

     "But not a valet to brush his clothes," cut in the priest,
with a curious dryness, "for the valet would want to brush his wig, too."

     The librarian turned to him and seemed to forget my presence;
he was strongly moved and, I think, a little heated with wine.
"I don't know how you know it, Father Brown," he said, "but you are right.
He lets the whole world do everything for him--except dress him.
And that he insists on doing in a literal solitude like a desert.
Anybody is kicked out of the house without a character who is
so much as found near his dressing-room door.,

     "He seems a pleasant old party," I remarked.

     "No," replied Dr Mull quite simply; "and yet that is just what
I mean by saying you are unjust to him after all.  Gentlemen, the Duke
does really feel the bitterness about the curse that he uttered just now.
He does, with sincere shame and terror, hide under that purple wig
something he thinks it would blast the sons of man to see.
I know it is so; and I know it is not a mere natural disfigurement,
like a criminal mutilation, or a hereditary disproportion in the features.
I know it is worse than that; because a man told me who was present
at a scene that no man could invent, where a stronger man than
any of us tried to defy the secret, and was scared away from it."

     I opened my mouth to speak, but Mull went on in oblivion of me,
speaking out of the cavern of his hands.  "I don't mind telling you,
Father, because it's really more defending the poor Duke than
giving him away.  Didn't you ever hear of the time when he
very nearly lost all the estates?"

     The priest shook his head; and the librarian proceeded to
tell the tale as he had heard it from his predecessor in the same post,
who had been his patron and instructor, and whom he seemed to trust
implicitly.  Up to a certain point it was a common enough tale
of the decline of a great family's fortunes--the tale of a family lawyer.
His lawyer, however, had the sense to cheat honestly, if the expression
explains itself.  Instead of using funds he held in trust,
he took advantage of the Duke's carelessness to put the family in
a financial hole, in which it might be necessary for the Duke to
let him hold them in reality.

     The lawyer's name was Isaac Green, but the Duke always called him
Elisha; presumably in reference to the fact that he was quite bald,
though certainly not more than thirty.  He had risen very rapidly,
but from very dirty beginnings; being first a "nark" or informer,
and then a money-lender:  but as solicitor to the Eyres he had the sense,
as I say, to keep technically straight until he was ready to deal
the final blow.  The blow fell at dinner; and the old librarian said
he should never forget the very look of the lampshades and the decanters,
as the little lawyer, with a steady smile, proposed to the great landlord
that they should halve the estates between them.  The sequel certainly
could not be overlooked; for the Duke, in dead silence, smashed
a decanter on the man's bald head as suddenly as I had seen him smash
the glass that day in the orchard.  It left a red triangular scar
on the scalp, and the lawyer's eyes altered, but not his smile.

     He rose tottering to his feet, and struck back as such men do strike.
"I am glad of that," he said, "for now I can take the whole estate.
The law will give it to me."

     Exmoor, it seems, was white as ashes, but his eyes still blazed.
"The law will give it you," he said; "but you will not take it....
Why not?  Why? because it would mean the crack of doom for me,
and if you take it I shall take off my wig....  Why, you pitiful
plucked fowl, anyone can see your bare head.  But no man shall
see mine and live."

     Well, you may say what you like and make it mean what you like.
But Mull swears it is the solemn fact that the lawyer, after shaking
his knotted fists in the air for an instant, simply ran from the room
and never reappeared in the countryside; and since then Exmoor has been
feared more for a warlock than even for a landlord and a magistrate.

     Now Dr Mull told his story with rather wild theatrical gestures,
and with a passion I think at least partisan.  I was quite conscious
of the possibility that the whole was the extravagance of
an old braggart and gossip.  But before I end this half of my discoveries,
I think it due to Dr Mull to record that my two first inquiries
have confirmed his story.  I learned from an old apothecary in the village
that there was a bald man in evening dress, giving the name of Green,
who came to him one night to have a three-cornered cut on his forehead
plastered.  And I learnt from the legal records and old newspapers
that there was a lawsuit threatened, and at least begun, by one Green
against the Duke of Exmoor.


     Mr Nutt, of the Daily Reformer, wrote some highly incongruous
words across the top of the copy, made some highly mysterious marks
down the side of it, and called to Miss Barlow in the same loud,
monotonous voice:  "Take down a letter to Mr Finn."

     DEAR FINN,--Your copy will do, but I have had to headline it a bit;
and our public would never stand a Romanist priest in the story--
you must keep your eye on the suburbs.  I've altered him to Mr Brown,
a Spiritualist.

                                             Yours,

                                                  E.  NUTT.


     A day or two afterward found the active and judicious editor
examining, with blue eyes that seemed to grow rounder and rounder,
the second instalment of Mr Finn's tale of mysteries in high life.
It began with the words:


     I have made an astounding discovery.  I freely confess it is
quite different from anything I expected to discover, and will give
a much more practical shock to the public.  I venture to say,
without any vanity, that the words I now write will be read all over Europe,
and certainly all over America and the Colonies.  And yet I heard
all I have to tell before I left this same little wooden table in this
same little wood of apple-trees.

     I owe it all to the small priest Brown; he is an extraordinary man.
The big librarian had left the table, perhaps ashamed of his long tongue,
perhaps anxious about the storm in which his mysterious master
had vanished:  anyway, he betook himself heavily in the Duke's tracks
through the trees.  Father Brown had picked up one of the lemons and
was eyeing it with an odd pleasure.

     "What a lovely colour a lemon is!" he said.  "There's one thing
I don't like about the Duke's wig--the colour."

     "I don't think I understand," I answered.

     "I dare say he's got good reason to cover his ears, like King Midas,"
went on the priest, with a cheerful simplicity which somehow seemed
rather flippant under the circumstances.  "I can quite understand
that it's nicer to cover them with hair than with brass plates or
leather flaps.  But if he wants to use hair, why doesn't he make it
look like hair?  There never was hair of that colour in this world.
It looks more like a sunset-cloud coming through the wood.
Why doesn't he conceal the family curse better, if he's really
so ashamed of it?  Shall I tell you?  It's because he isn't ashamed of it.
He's proud of it"

     "It's an ugly wig to be proud of--and an ugly story," I said.

     "Consider," replied this curious little man, "how you yourself
really feel about such things.  I don't suggest you're either
more snobbish or more morbid than the rest of us:  but don't you feel
in a vague way that a genuine old family curse is rather a fine thing
to have?  Would you be ashamed, wouldn't you be a little proud,
if the heir of the Glamis horror called you his friend? or if Byron's
family had confided, to you only, the evil adventures of their race?
Don't be too hard on the aristocrats themselves if their heads are
as weak as ours would be, and they are snobs about their own sorrows."

     "By Jove!" I cried; "and that's true enough.  My own mother's family
had a banshee; and, now I come to think of it, it has comforted me
in many a cold hour."

     "And think," he went on, "of that stream of blood and poison
that spurted from his thin lips the instant you so much as mentioned
his ancestors.  Why should he show every stranger over such
a Chamber of Horrors unless he is proud of it?  He doesn't conceal his wig,
he doesn't conceal his blood, he doesn't conceal his family curse,
he doesn't conceal the family crimes--but--"

     The little man's voice changed so suddenly, he shut his hand
so sharply, and his eyes so rapidly grew rounder and brighter
like a waking owl's, that it had all the abruptness of a small explosion
on the table.

     "But," he ended, "he does really conceal his toilet."

     It somehow completed the thrill of my fanciful nerves that
at that instant the Duke appeared again silently among the glimmering trees,
with his soft foot and sunset-hued hair, coming round the corner of
the house in company with his librarian.  Before he came within earshot,
Father Brown had added quite composedly, "Why does he really hide
the secret of what he does with the purple wig?  Because it isn't
the sort of secret we suppose."

     The Duke came round the corner and resumed his seat at the head
of the table with all his native dignity.  The embarrassment of
the librarian left him hovering on his hind legs, like a huge bear.
The Duke addressed the priest with great seriousness.  "Father Brown,"
he said, "Doctor Mull informs me that you have come here to make a request.
I no longer profess an observance of the religion of my fathers;
but for their sakes, and for the sake of the days when we met before,
I am very willing to hear you.  But I presume you would rather
be heard in private."

     Whatever I retain of the gentleman made me stand up.
Whatever I have attained of the journalist made me stand still.
Before this paralysis could pass, the priest had made a momentarily
detaining motion.  "If," he said, "your Grace will permit me
my real petition, or if I retain any right to advise you, I would urge
that as many people as possible should be present.  All over this country
I have found hundreds, even of my own faith and flock, whose imaginations
are poisoned by the spell which I implore you to break.  I wish we could
have all Devonshire here to see you do it."

     "To see me do what?" asked the Duke, arching his eyebrows.

     "To see you take off your wig," said Father Brown.

     The Duke's face did not move; but he looked at his petitioner
with a glassy stare which was the most awful expression I have ever seen
on a human face.  I could see the librarian's great legs wavering
under him like the shadows of stems in a pool; and I could not banish
from my own brain the fancy that the trees all around us were
filling softly in the silence with devils instead of birds.

     "I spare you," said the Duke in a voice of inhuman pity.
"I refuse.  If I gave you the faintest hint of the load of horror
I have to bear alone, you would lie shrieking at these feet of mine
and begging to know no more.  I will spare you the hint.
You shall not spell the first letter of what is written on
the altar of the Unknown God."

     "I know the Unknown God," said the little priest, with an
unconscious grandeur of certitude that stood up like a granite tower.
"I know his name; it is Satan.  The true God was made flesh
and dwelt among us.  And I say to you, wherever you find men ruled
merely by mystery, it is the mystery of iniquity.  If the devil
tells you something is too fearful to look at, look at it.
If he says something is too terrible to hear, hear it.  If you think
some truth unbearable, bear it.  I entreat your Grace to end
this nightmare now and here at this table."

     "If I did," said the Duke in a low voice, "you and all you believe,
and all by which alone you live, would be the first to shrivel and perish.
You would have an instant to know the great Nothing before you died."

     "The Cross of Christ be between me and harm," said Father Brown.
"Take off your wig."

     I was leaning over the table in ungovernable excitement;
in listening to this extraordinary duel half a thought had
come into my head.  "Your Grace," I cried, "I call your bluff.
Take off that wig or I will knock it off."

     I suppose I can be prosecuted for assault, but I am very glad
I did it.  When he said, in the same voice of stone, "I refuse,"
I simply sprang on him.  For three long instants he strained against me
as if he had all hell to help him; but I forced his head until
the hairy cap fell off it.  I admit that, whilst wrestling,
I shut my eyes as it fell.

     I was awakened by a cry from Mull, who was also by this time
at the Duke's side.  His head and mine were both bending over
the bald head of the wigless Duke.  Then the silence was snapped
by the librarian exclaiming:  "What can it mean?  Why, the man had
nothing to hide.  His ears are just like everybody else's."

     "Yes," said Father Brown, "that is what he had to hide."

     The priest walked straight up to him, but strangely enough
did not even glance at his ears.  He stared with an almost comical
seriousness at his bald forehead, and pointed to a three-cornered
cicatrice, long healed, but still discernible.  "Mr Green, I think."
he said politely, "and he did get the whole estate after all."

     And now let me tell the readers of the Daily Reformer
what I think the most remarkable thing in the whole affair.
This transformation scene, which will seem to you as wild and purple
as a Persian fairy-tale, has been (except for my technical assault)
strictly legal and constitutional from its first beginnings.
This man with the odd scar and the ordinary ears is not an impostor.
Though (in one sense) he wears another man's wig and claims
another man's ear, he has not stolen another man's coronet.
He really is the one and only Duke of Exmoor.  What happened was this.
The old Duke really had a slight malformation of the ear, which really
was more or less hereditary.  He really was morbid about it;
and it is likely enough that he did invoke it as a kind of curse
in the violent scene (which undoubtedly happened) in which he struck
Green with the decanter.  But the contest ended very differently.
Green pressed his claim and got the estates; the dispossessed nobleman
shot himself and died without issue.  After a decent interval
the beautiful English Government revived the "extinct" peerage of Exmoor,
and bestowed it, as is usual, on the most important person,
the person who had got the property.

     This man used the old feudal fables--properly, in his snobbish soul,
really envied and admired them.  So that thousands of poor English people
trembled before a mysterious chieftain with an ancient destiny and
a diadem of evil stars--when they are really trembling before
a guttersnipe who was a pettifogger and a pawnbroker not twelve years ago.
I think it very typical of the real case against our aristocracy as it is,
and as it will be till God sends us braver men.


     Mr Nutt put down the manuscript and called out with unusual
sharpness:  "Miss Barlow, please take down a letter to Mr Finn."

     DEAR FINN,--You must be mad; we can't touch this.  I wanted vampires
and the bad old days and aristocracy hand-in-hand with superstition.
They like that But you must know the Exmoors would never forgive this.
And what would our people say then, I should like to know!  Why, Sir Simon
is one of Exmoor's greatest pals; and it would ruin that cousin of
the Eyres that's standing for us at Bradford.  Besides, old Soap-Suds
was sick enough at not getting his peerage last year; he'd sack me by wire
if I lost him it with such lunacy as this.  And what about Duffey?
He's doing us some rattling articles on "The Heel of the Norman."
And how can he write about Normans if the man's only a solicitor?
Do be reasonable.--Yours, E. NUTT.

     As Miss Barlow rattled away cheerfully, he crumpled up the copy
and tossed it into the waste-paper basket; but not before he had,
automatically and by force of habit, altered the word "God"
to the word "circumstances."



VIII. The Perishing of the Pendragons


FATHER BROWN was in no mood for adventures.  He had lately fallen ill
with over-work, and when he began to recover, his friend Flambeau
had taken him on a cruise in a small yacht with Sir Cecil Fanshaw,
a young Cornish squire and an enthusiast for Cornish coast scenery.
But Brown was still rather weak; he was no very happy sailor;
and though he was never of the sort that either grumbles or breaks down,
his spirits did not rise above patience and civility.  When the other
two men praised the ragged violet sunset or the ragged volcanic crags,
he agreed with them.  When Flambeau pointed out a rock shaped
like a dragon, he looked at it and thought it very like a dragon.
When Fanshaw more excitedly indicated a rock that was like Merlin,
he looked at it, and signified assent.  When Flambeau asked whether
this rocky gate of the twisted river was not the gate of Fairyland,
he said "Yes."  He heard the most important things and the most trivial
with the same tasteless absorption.  He heard that the coast was death
to all but careful seamen; he also heard that the ship's cat was asleep.
He heard that Fanshaw couldn't find his cigar-holder anywhere;
he also heard the pilot deliver the oracle "Both eyes bright,
she's all right; one eye winks, down she sinks."  He heard Flambeau
say to Fanshaw that no doubt this meant the pilot must keep both eyes
open and be spry.  And he heard Fanshaw say to Flambeau that,
oddly enough, it didn't mean this:  it meant that while they
saw two of the coast lights, one near and the other distant,
exactly side by side, they were in the right river-channel;
but that if one light was hidden behind the other, they were going
on the rocks.  He heard Fanshaw add that his country was full of
such quaint fables and idioms; it was the very home of romance;
he even pitted this part of Cornwall against Devonshire, as a claimant
to the laurels of Elizabethan seamanship.  According to him
there had been captains among these coves and islets compared with whom
Drake was practically a landsman.  He heard Flambeau laugh, and ask if,
perhaps, the adventurous title of "Westward Ho!" only meant that
all Devonshire men wished they were living in Cornwall.  He heard Fanshaw
say there was no need to be silly; that not only had Cornish captains
been heroes, but that they were heroes still:  that near that very spot
there was an old admiral, now retired, who was scarred by thrilling voyages
full of adventures; and who had in his youth found the last group
of eight Pacific Islands that was added to the chart of the world.
This Cecil Fanshaw was, in person, of the kind that commonly urges
such crude but pleasing enthusiasms; a very young man, light-haired,
high-coloured, with an eager profile; with a boyish bravado of spirits,
but an almost girlish delicacy of tint and type.  The big shoulders,
black brows and black mousquetaire swagger of Flambeau
were a great contrast.

     All these trivialities Brown heard and saw; but heard them
as a tired man hears a tune in the railway wheels, or saw them
as a sick man sees the pattern of his wall-paper.  No one can calculate
the turns of mood in convalescence:  but Father Brown's depression
must have had a great deal to do with his mere unfamiliarity with the sea.
For as the river mouth narrowed like the neck of a bottle,
and the water grew calmer and the air warmer and more earthly,
he seemed to wake up and take notice like a baby.  They had reached
that phase just after sunset when air and water both look bright,
but earth and all its growing things look almost black by comparison.
About this particular  evening, however, there was something exceptional.
It was one of those rare atmospheres in which a smoked-glass slide
seems to have been slid away from between us and Nature; so that even
dark colours on that day look more gorgeous than bright colours
on cloudier days.  The trampled earth of the river-banks and
the peaty stain in the pools did not look drab but glowing umber,
and the dark woods astir in the breeze did not look, as usual, dim blue
with mere depth of distance, but more like wind-tumbled masses of some
vivid violet blossom.  This magic clearness and intensity in the colours
was further forced on Brown's slowly reviving senses by something
romantic and even secret in the very form of the landscape.

     The river was still well wide and deep enough for a pleasure boat
so small as theirs; but the curves of the country-side suggested
that it was closing in on either hand; the woods seemed to be making
broken and flying attempts at bridge-building--as if the boat
were passing from the romance of a valley to the romance of a hollow
and so to the supreme romance of a tunnel.  Beyond this mere
look of things there was little for Brown's freshening fancy to feed on;
he saw no human beings, except some gipsies trailing along the river bank,
with faggots and osiers cut in the forest; and one sight
no longer unconventional, but in such remote parts still uncommon:
a dark-haired lady, bare-headed, and paddling her own canoe.
If Father Brown ever attached any importance to either of these,
he certainly forgot them at the next turn of the river which
brought in sight a singular object.

     The water seemed to widen and split, being cloven by the dark wedge
of a fish-shaped and wooded islet.  With the rate at which they went,
the islet seemed to swim towards them like a ship; a ship with
a very high prow--or, to speak more strictly, a very high funnel.
For at the extreme point nearest them stood up an odd-looking building,
unlike anything they could remember or connect with any purpose.
It was not specially high, but it was too high for its breadth
to be called anything but a tower.  Yet it appeared to be built
entirely of wood, and that in a most unequal and eccentric way.
Some of the planks and beams were of good, seasoned oak; some of
such wood cut raw and recent; some again of white pinewood,
and a great deal more of the same sort of wood painted black with tar.
These black beams were set crooked or crisscross at all kinds of angles,
giving the whole a most patchy and puzzling appearance.
There were one or two windows, which appeared to be coloured and
leaded in an old-fashioned but more elaborate style.  The travellers
looked at it with that paradoxical feeling we have when something
reminds us of something, and yet we are certain it is something
very different.

     Father Brown, even when he was mystified, was clever in analysing
his own mystification.  And he found himself reflecting that
the oddity seemed to consist in a particular shape cut out in
an incongruous material; as if one saw a top-hat made of tin,
or a frock-coat cut out of tartan.  He was sure he had seen timbers
of different tints arranged like that somewhere, but never
in such architectural proportions.  The next moment a glimpse
through the dark trees told him all he wanted to know and he laughed.
Through a gap in the foliage there appeared for a moment one of those
old wooden houses, faced with black beams, which are still to be found
here and there in England, but which most of us see imitated
in some show called "Old London" or "Shakespeare's England'.
It was in view only long enough for the priest to see that,
however old-fashioned, it was a comfortable and well-kept country-house,
with flower-beds in front of it.  It had none of the piebald and crazy
look of the tower that seemed made out of its refuse.

     "What on earth's this?" said Flambeau, who was still staring
at the tower.

     Fanshaw's eyes were shining, and he spoke triumphantly.
"Aha! you've not seen a place quite like this before, I fancy;
that's why I've brought you here, my friend.  Now you shall see
whether I exaggerate about the mariners of Cornwall.  This place belongs
to Old Pendragon, whom we call the Admiral; though he retired
before getting the rank.  The spirit of Raleigh and Hawkins is a memory
with the Devon folk; it's a modern fact with the Pendragons.
If Queen Elizabeth were to rise from the grave and come up this river
in a gilded barge, she would be received by the Admiral in a house
exactly such as she was accustomed to, in every corner and casement,
in every panel on the wall or plate on the table.  And she would find
an English Captain still talking fiercely of fresh lands to be found
in little ships, as much as if she had dined with Drake."

     "She'd find a rum sort of thing in the garden," said Father Brown,
"which would not please her Renaissance eye.  That Elizabethan domestic
architecture is charming in its way; but it's against the very nature
of it to break out into turrets."

     "And yet," answered Fanshaw, "that's the most romantic and
Elizabethan part of the business.  It was built by the Pendragons
in the very days of the Spanish wars; and though it's needed patching
and even rebuilding for another reason, it's always been rebuilt
in the old way.  The story goes that the lady of Sir Peter Pendragon
built it in this place and to this height, because from the top
you can just see the corner where vessels turn into the river mouth;
and she wished to be the first to see her husband's ship,
as he sailed home from the Spanish Main."

     "For what other reason," asked Father Brown, "do you mean that
it has been rebuilt?"

     "Oh, there's a strange story about that, too," said the young squire
with relish.  "You are really in a land of strange stories.
King Arthur was here and Merlin and the fairies before him.
The story goes that Sir Peter Pendragon, who (I fear) had some of
the faults of the pirates as well as the virtues of the sailor,
was bringing home three Spanish gentlemen in honourable captivity,
intending to escort them to Elizabeth's court.  But he was a man
of flaming and tigerish temper, and coming to high words with one of them,
he caught him by the throat and flung him by accident or design,
into the sea.  A second Spaniard, who was the brother of the first,
instantly drew his sword and flew at Pendragon, and after a short but
furious combat in which both got three wounds in as many minutes,
Pendragon drove his blade through the other's body and the second Spaniard
was accounted for.  As it happened the ship had already turned
into the river mouth and was close to comparatively shallow water.
The third Spaniard sprang over the side of the ship, struck out
for the shore, and was soon near enough to it to stand up to his waist
in water.  And turning again to face the ship, and holding up both
arms to Heaven--like a prophet calling plagues upon a wicked city--
he called out to Pendragon in a piercing and terrible voice,
that he at least was yet living, that he would go on living,
that he would live for ever; and that generation after generation
the house of Pendragon should never see him or his, but should know
by very certain signs that he and his vengeance were alive.
With that he dived under the wave, and was either drowned or swam
so long under water that no hair of his head was seen afterwards."

     "There's that girl in the canoe again," said Flambeau irrelevantly,
for good-looking young women would call him off any topic.
"She seems bothered by the queer tower just as we were."

     Indeed, the black-haired young lady was letting her canoe float
slowly and silently past the strange islet; and was looking intently up
at the strange tower, with a strong glow of curiosity on her oval
and olive face.

     "Never mind girls," said Fanshaw impatiently, "there are plenty
of them in the world, but not many things like the Pendragon Tower.
As you may easily suppose, plenty of superstitions and scandals
have followed in the track of the Spaniard's curse; and no doubt,
as you would put it, any accident happening to this Cornish family
would be connected with it by rural credulity.  But it is perfectly true
that this tower has been burnt down two or three times; and the family
can't be called lucky, for more than two, I think, of the Admiral's
near kin have perished by shipwreck; and one at least, to my own knowledge,
on practically the same spot where Sir Peter threw the Spaniard overboard."

     "What a pity!" exclaimed Flambeau.  "She's going."

     "When did your friend the Admiral tell you this family history?"
asked Father Brown, as the girl in the canoe paddled off,
without showing the least intention of extending her interest from
the tower to the yacht, which Fanshaw had already caused to lie
alongside the island.

     "Many years ago," replied Fanshaw; "he hasn't been to sea for
some time now, though he is as keen on it as ever.  I believe there's
a family compact or something.  Well, here's the landing stage;
let's come ashore and see the old boy."

     They followed him on to the island, just under the tower,
and Father Brown, whether from the mere touch of dry land, or the interest
of something on the other bank of the river (which he stared at
very hard for some seconds), seemed singularly improved in briskness.
They entered a wooded avenue between two fences of thin greyish wood,
such as often enclose parks or gardens, and over the top of which
the dark trees tossed to and fro like black and purple plumes upon
the hearse of a giant.  The tower, as they left it behind,
looked all the quainter, because such entrances are usually flanked
by two towers; and this one looked lopsided.  But for this, the avenue
had the usual appearance of the entrance to a gentleman's grounds;
and, being so curved that the house was now out of sight,
somehow looked a much larger park than any plantation on such an island
could really be.  Father Brown was, perhaps, a little fanciful
in his fatigue, but he almost thought the whole place must be
growing larger, as things do in a nightmare.  Anyhow, a mystical monotony
was the only character of their march, until Fanshaw suddenly stopped,
and pointed to something sticking out through the grey fence--
something that looked at first rather like the imprisoned horn
of some beast.  Closer observation showed that it was
a slightly curved blade of metal that shone faintly in the fading light.

     Flambeau, who like all Frenchmen had been a soldier, bent over it
and said in a startled voice:  "Why, it's a sabre!  I believe
I know the sort, heavy and curved, but shorter than the cavalry;
they used to have them in artillery and the--"

     As he spoke the blade plucked itself out of the crack it had made
and came down again with a more ponderous slash, splitting
the fissiparous fence to the bottom with a rending noise.
Then it was pulled out again, flashed above the fence some feet
further along, and again split it halfway down with the first stroke;
and after waggling a little to extricate itself (accompanied with
curses in the darkness) split it down to the ground with a second.
Then a kick of devilish energy sent the whole loosened square
of thin wood flying into the pathway, and a great gap of dark coppice
gaped in the paling.

     Fanshaw peered into the dark opening and uttered an exclamation
of astonishment.  "My dear Admiral!" he exclaimed, "do you--er--
do you generally cut out a new front door whenever you want to
go for a walk?"

     The voice in the gloom swore again, and then broke into a jolly laugh.
"No," it said; "I've really got to cut down this fence somehow;
it's spoiling all the plants, and no one else here can do it.
But I'll only carve another bit off the front door, and then come out
and welcome you."

     And sure enough, he heaved up his weapon once more, and,
hacking twice, brought down another and similar strip of fence,
making the opening about fourteen feet wide in all.  Then through this
larger forest gateway he came out into the evening light,
with a chip of grey wood sticking to his sword-blade.

     He momentarily fulfilled all Fanshaw's fable of an old piratical
Admiral; though the details seemed afterwards to decompose into accidents.
For instance, he wore a broad-brimmed hat as protection against the sun;
but the front flap of it was turned up straight to the sky, and the
two corners pulled down lower than the ears, so that it stood across
his forehead in a crescent like the old cocked hat worn by Nelson.
He wore an ordinary dark-blue jacket, with nothing special about
the buttons, but the combination of it with white linen trousers
somehow had a sailorish look.  He was tall and loose, and walked with
a sort of swagger, which was not a sailor's roll, and yet somehow
suggested it; and he held in his hand a short sabre which was like
a navy cutlass, but about twice as big.  Under the bridge of the hat
his eagle face looked eager, all the more because it was not only
clean-shaven, but without eyebrows.  It seemed almost as if all
the hair had come off his face from his thrusting it through
a throng of elements.  His eyes were prominent and piercing.
His colour was curiously attractive, while partly tropical;
it reminded one vaguely of a blood-orange.  That is, that while it was
ruddy and sanguine, there was a yellow in it that was in no way sickly,
but seemed rather to glow like gold apples of the Hesperides--
Father Brown thought he had never seen a figure so expressive
of all the romances about the countries of the Sun.

     When Fanshaw had presented his two friends to their host
he fell again into a tone of rallying the latter about his wreckage
of the fence and his apparent rage of profanity.  The Admiral pooh-poohed
it at first as a piece of necessary but annoying garden work;
but at length the ring of real energy came back into his laughter,
and he cried with a mixture of impatience and good humour:

     "Well, perhaps I do go at it a bit rabidly, and feel
a kind of pleasure in smashing anything.  So would you if your
only pleasure was in cruising about to find some new Cannibal Islands,
and you had to stick on this muddy little rockery in a sort of rustic pond.
When I remember how I've cut down a mile and a half of green poisonous
jungle with an old cutlass half as sharp as this; and then remember
I must stop here and chop this matchwood, because of some confounded
old bargain scribbled in a family Bible, why, I--"

     He swung up the heavy steel again; and this time sundered
the wall of wood from top to bottom at one stroke.

     "I feel like that," he said laughing, but furiously flinging
the sword some yards down the path, "and now let's go up to the house;
you must have some dinner."

     The semicircle of lawn in front of the house was varied by
three circular garden beds, one of red tulips, a second of
yellow tulips, and the third of some white, waxen-looking blossoms
that the visitors did not know and presumed to be exotic.
A heavy, hairy and rather sullen-looking gardener was hanging up
a heavy coil of garden hose.  The corners of the expiring sunset
which seemed to cling about the corners of the house gave glimpses
here and there of the colours of remoter flowerbeds; and in
a treeless space on one side of the house opening upon the river
stood a tall brass tripod on which was tilted a big brass telescope.
Just outside the steps of the porch stood a little painted
green garden table, as if someone had just had tea there.
The entrance was flanked with two of those half-featured lumps of stone
with holes for eyes that are said to be South Sea idols; and on
the brown oak beam across the doorway were some confused carvings
that looked almost as barbaric.

     As they passed indoors, the little cleric hopped suddenly
on to the table, and standing on it peered unaffectedly
through his spectacles at the mouldings in the oak.  Admiral Pendragon
looked very much astonished, though not particularly annoyed;
while Fanshaw was so amused with what looked like a performing pigmy
on his little stand, that he could not control his laughter.
But Father Brown was not likely to notice either the laughter
or the astonishment.

     He was gazing at three carved symbols, which, though very worn
and obscure, seemed still to convey some sense to him.  The first
seemed to be the outline of some tower or other building, crowned with
what looked like curly-pointed ribbons.  The second was clearer:
an old Elizabethan galley with decorative waves beneath it,
but interrupted in the middle by a curious jagged rock, which was either
a fault in the wood or some conventional representation of the water
coming in.  The third represented the upper half of a human figure,
ending in an escalloped line like the waves; the face was rubbed
and featureless, and both arms were held very stiffly up in the air.

     "Well," muttered Father Brown, blinking, "here is the legend
of the Spaniard plain enough.  Here he is holding up his arms
and cursing in the sea; and here are the two curses:  the wrecked ship
and the burning of Pendragon Tower."

     Pendragon shook his head with a kind of venerable amusement.
"And how many other things might it not be?" he said.  "Don't you know
that that sort of half-man, like a half-lion or half-stag,
is quite common in heraldry?  Might not that line through the ship
be one of those parti-per-pale lines, indented, I think they call it?
And though the third thing isn't so very heraldic, it would be
more heraldic to suppose it a tower crowned with laurel than with fire;
and it looks just as like it."

     "But it seems rather odd," said Flambeau, "that it should
exactly confirm the old legend."

     "Ah," replied the sceptical traveller, "but you don't know
how much of the old legend may have been made up from the old figures.
Besides, it isn't the only old legend.  Fanshaw, here, who is
fond of such things, will tell you there are other versions of the tale,
and much more horrible ones.  One story credits my unfortunate ancestor
with having had the Spaniard cut in two; and that will fit
the pretty picture also.  Another obligingly credits our family
with the possession of a tower full of snakes and explains those little,
wriggly things in that way.  And a third theory supposes the crooked line
on the ship to be a conventionalized thunderbolt; but that alone,
if seriously examined, would show what a very little way these
unhappy coincidences really go."

     "Why, how do you mean?" asked Fanshaw.

     "It so happens," replied his host coolly, "that there was
no thunder and lightning at all in the two or three shipwrecks
I know of in our family."

     "Oh!" said Father Brown, and jumped down from the little table.

     There was another silence in which they heard the continuous murmur
of the river; then Fanshaw said, in a doubtful and perhaps
disappointed tone:  "Then you don't think there is anything in the
tales of the tower in flames?"

     "There are the tales, of course," said the Admiral,
shrugging his shoulders; "and some of them, I don't deny,
on evidence as decent as one ever gets for such things.
Someone saw a blaze hereabout, don't you know, as he walked home
through a wood; someone keeping sheep on the uplands inland thought
he saw a flame hovering over Pendragon Tower.  Well, a damp dab of mud
like this confounded island seems the last place where one would
think of fires."

     "What is that fire over there?" asked Father Brown with
a gentle suddenness, pointing to the woods on the left river-bank.
They were all thrown a little off their balance, and the more fanciful
Fanshaw had even some difficulty in recovering his, as they saw a long,
thin stream of blue smoke ascending silently into the end of
the evening light.

     Then Pendragon broke into a scornful laugh again.  "Gipsies!"
he said; "they've been camping about here for about a week.
Gentlemen, you want your dinner," and he turned as if to enter the house.

     But the antiquarian superstition in Fanshaw was still quivering,
and he said hastily:  "But, Admiral, what's that hissing noise
quite near the island?  It's very like fire."

     "It's more like what it is," said the Admiral, laughing as he
led the way; "it's only some canoe going by."

     Almost as he spoke, the butler, a lean man in black,
with very black hair and a very long, yellow face, appeared in the doorway
and told him that dinner was served.

     The dining-room was as nautical as the cabin of a ship;
but its note was rather that of the modern than the Elizabethan captain.
There were, indeed, three antiquated cutlasses in a trophy over
the fireplace, and one brown sixteenth-century map with Tritons
and little ships dotted about a curly sea.  But such things were
less prominent on the white panelling than some cases of quaint-coloured
South American birds, very scientifically stuffed, fantastic shells
from the Pacific, and several instruments so rude and queer in shape
that savages might have used them either to kill their enemies or
to cook them.  But the alien colour culminated in the fact that,
besides the butler, the Admiral's only servants were two negroes,
somewhat quaintly clad in tight uniforms of yellow.  The priest's
instinctive trick of analysing his own impressions told him that
the colour and the little neat coat-tails of these bipeds had suggested
the word "Canary," and so by a mere pun connected them with
southward travel.  Towards the end of the dinner they took their
yellow clothes and black faces out of the room, leaving only
the black clothes and yellow face of the butler.

     "I'm rather sorry you take this so lightly," said Fanshaw to the host;
"for the truth is, I've brought these friends of mine with the idea
of their helping you, as they know a good deal of these things.
Don't you really believe in the family story at all?"

     "I don't believe in anything," answered Pendragon very briskly,
with a bright eye cocked at a red tropical bird.  "I'm a man of science."

     Rather to Flambeau's surprise, his clerical friend,
who seemed to have entirely woken up, took up the digression and
talked natural history with his host with a flow of words and
much unexpected information, until the dessert and decanters were
set down and the last of the servants vanished.  Then he said,
without altering his tone.

     "Please don't think me impertinent, Admiral Pendragon.  I don't
ask for curiosity, but really for my guidance and your convenience.
Have I made a bad shot if I guess you don't want these old things
talked of before your butler?"

     The Admiral lifted the hairless arches over his eyes and exclaimed:
"Well, I don't know where you got it, but the truth is I can't stand
the fellow, though I've no excuse for discharging a family servant.
Fanshaw, with his fairy tales, would say my blood moved against men
with that black, Spanish-looking hair."

     Flambeau struck the table with his heavy fist.  "By Jove!" he cried;
"and so had that girl!"

     "I hope it'll all end tonight," continued the Admiral,
"when my nephew comes back safe from his ship.  You looked surprised.
You won't understand, I suppose, unless I tell you the story.
You see, my father had two sons; I remained a bachelor,
but my elder brother married, and had a son who became a sailor
like all the rest of us, and will inherit the proper estate.
Well, my father was a strange man; he somehow combined Fanshaw's
superstition with a good deal of my scepticism--they were always
fighting in him; and after my first voyages, he developed a notion
which he thought somehow would settle finally whether the curse
was truth or trash.  If all the Pendragons sailed about anyhow,
he thought there would be too much chance of natural catastrophes
to prove anything.  But if we went to sea one at a time in strict order
of succession to the property, he thought it might show whether any
connected fate followed the family as a family.  It was a silly notion,
I think, and I quarrelled with my father pretty heartily; for I was
an ambitious man and was left to the last, coming, by succession,
after my own nephew."

     "And your father and brother," said the priest, very gently,
"died at sea, I fear."

     "Yes," groaned the Admiral; "by one of those brutal accidents
on which are built all the lying mythologies of mankind,
they were both shipwrecked.  My father, coming up this coast
out of the Atlantic, was washed up on these Cornish rocks.
My brother's ship was sunk, no one knows where, on the voyage home
from Tasmania.  His body was never found.  I tell you it was
from perfectly natural mishap; lots of other people besides Pendragons
were drowned; and both disasters are discussed in a normal way
by navigators.  But, of course, it set this forest of superstition on fire;
and men saw the flaming tower everywhere.  That's why I say it will
be all right when Walter returns.  The girl he's engaged to was
coming today; but I was so afraid of some chance delay frightening her
that I wired her not to come till she heard from me.  But he's practically
sure to be here some time tonight, and then it'll all end in smoke--
tobacco smoke.  We'll crack that old lie when we crack a bottle
of this wine."

     "Very good wine," said Father Brown, gravely lifting his glass,
"but, as you see, a very bad wine-bibber.  I most sincerely
beg your pardon":  for he had spilt a small spot of wine on
the table-cloth.  He drank and put down the glass with a composed face;
but his hand had started at the exact moment when he became conscious
of a face looking in through the garden window just behind the Admiral--
the face of a woman, swarthy, with southern hair and eyes, and young,
but like a mask of tragedy.

     After a pause the priest spoke again in his mild manner.
"Admiral," he said, "will you do me a favour?  Let me, and my friends
if they like, stop in that tower of yours just for tonight?
Do you know that in my business you're an exorcist almost before
anything else?"

     Pendragon sprang to his feet and paced swiftly to and fro
across the window, from which the face had instantly vanished.
"I tell you there is nothing in it," he cried, with ringing violence.
"There is one thing I know about this matter.  You may call me an atheist.
I am an atheist."  Here he swung round and fixed Father Brown with a face
of frightful concentration.  "This business is perfectly natural.
There is no curse in it at all."

     Father Brown smiled.  "In that case," he said, "there can't be
any objection to my sleeping in your delightful summer-house."

     "The idea is utterly ridiculous," replied the Admiral,
beating a tattoo on the back of his chair.

     "Please forgive me for everything," said Brown in his most
sympathetic tone, "including spilling the wine.  But it seems to me
you are not quite so easy about the flaming tower as you try to be."

     Admiral Pendragon sat down again as abruptly as he had risen;
but he sat quite still, and when he spoke again it was in a lower voice.
"You do it at your own peril," he said; "but wouldn't you be an atheist
to keep sane in all this devilry?"

     Some three hours afterwards Fanshaw, Flambeau and the priest
were still dawdling about the garden in the dark; and it began to dawn
on the other two that Father Brown had no intention of going to bed
either in the tower or the house.

     "I think the lawn wants weeding," said he dreamily.
"If I could find a spud or something I'd do it myself."

     They followed him, laughing and half remonstrating; but he replied
with the utmost solemnity, explaining to them, in a maddening little sermon,
that one can always find some small occupation that is helpful to others.
He did not find a spud; but he found an old broom made of twigs,
with which he began energetically to brush the fallen leaves off the grass.

     "Always some little thing to be done," he said with
idiotic cheerfulness; "as George Herbert says:  `Who sweeps
an Admiral's garden in Cornwall as for Thy laws makes that and
the action fine.' And now," he added, suddenly slinging the broom away,
"Let's go and water the flowers."

     With the same mixed emotions they watched him uncoil some
considerable lengths of the large garden hose, saying with an air of
wistful discrimination:  "The red tulips before the yellow, I think.
Look a bit dry, don't you think?"

     He turned the little tap on the instrument, and the water shot out
straight and solid as a long rod of steel.

     "Look out, Samson," cried Flambeau; "why, you've cut off
the tulip's head."

     Father Brown stood ruefully contemplating the decapitated plant.

     "Mine does seem to be a rather kill or cure sort of watering,"
he admitted, scratching his head.  "I suppose it's a pity I didn't
find the spud.  You should have seen me with the spud!  Talking of tools,
you've got that swordstick, Flambeau, you always carry?  That's right;
and Sir Cecil could have that sword the Admiral threw away
by the fence here.  How grey everything looks!"

     "The mist's rising from the river," said the staring Flambeau.

     Almost as he spoke the huge figure of the hairy gardener appeared
on a higher ridge of the trenched and terraced lawn, hailing them with
a brandished rake and a horribly bellowing voice.  "Put down that hose,"
he shouted; "put down that hose and go to your--"

     "I am fearfully clumsy," replied the reverend gentleman weakly;
"do you know, I upset some wine at dinner." He made a wavering
half-turn of apology towards the gardener, with the hose still spouting
in his hand.  The gardener caught the cold crash of the water
full in his face like the crash of a cannon-ball; staggered,
slipped and went sprawling with his boots in the air.

     "How very dreadful!" said Father Brown, looking round in
a sort of wonder.  "Why, I've hit a man!"

     He stood with his head forward for a moment as if
looking or listening; and then set off at a trot towards the tower,
still trailing the hose behind him.  The tower was quite close,
but its outline was curiously dim.

     "Your river mist," he said, "has a rum smell."

     "By the Lord it has," cried Fanshaw, who was very white.
"But you can't mean--"

     "I mean," said Father Brown, "that one of the Admiral's scientific
predictions is coming true tonight.  This story is going to end in smoke."

     As he spoke a most beautiful rose-red light seemed to burst
into blossom like a gigantic rose; but accompanied with a crackling
and rattling noise that was like the laughter of devils.

     "My God! what is this?" cried Sir Cecil Fanshaw.

     "The sign of the flaming tower," said Father Brown, and sent
the driving water from his hose into the heart of the red patch.

     "Lucky we hadn't gone to bed!" ejaculated Fanshaw.  "I suppose
it can't spread to the house."

     "You may remember," said the priest quietly, "that the wooden fence
that might have carried it was cut away."

     Flambeau turned electrified eyes upon his friend, but Fanshaw
only said rather absently:  "Well, nobody can be killed, anyhow."

     "This is rather a curious kind of tower," observed Father Brown,
"when it takes to killing people, it always kills people
who are somewhere else."

     At the same instant the monstrous figure of the gardener with
the streaming beard stood again on the green ridge against the sky,
waving others to come on; but now waving not a rake but a cutlass.
Behind him came the two negroes, also with the old crooked cutlasses
out of the trophy.  But in the blood-red glare, with their black faces
and yellow figures, they looked like devils carrying instruments of torture.
In the dim garden behind them a distant voice was heard calling out
brief directions.  When the priest heard the voice, a terrible change
came over his countenance.

     But he remained composed; and never took his eye off
the patch of flame which had begun by spreading, but now seemed
to shrink a little as it hissed under the torch of the long silver spear
of water.  He kept his finger along the nozzle of the pipe to ensure the aim,
and attended to no other business, knowing only by the noise and
that semi-conscious corner of the eye, the exciting incidents that
began to tumble themselves about the island garden.  He gave two brief
directions to his friends.  One was:  "Knock these fellows down somehow
and tie them up, whoever they are; there's rope down by those faggots.
They want to take away my nice hose." The other was:  "As soon as you
get a chance, call out to that canoeing girl; she's over on the bank
with the gipsies.  Ask her if they could get some buckets across
and fill them from the river."  Then he closed his mouth and continued
to water the new red flower as ruthlessly as he had watered the red tulip.

     He never turned his head to look at the strange fight that
followed between the foes and friends of the mysterious fire.
He almost felt the island shake when Flambeau collided with
the huge gardener; he merely imagined how it would whirl round them
as they wrestled.  He heard the crashing fall; and his friend's
gasp of triumph as he dashed on to the first negro; and the cries
of both the blacks as Flambeau and Fanshaw bound them.
Flambeau's enormous strength more than redressed the odds in the fight,
especially as the fourth man still hovered near the house,
only a shadow and a voice.  He heard also the water broken by
the paddles of a canoe; the girl's voice giving orders,
the voices of gipsies answering and coming nearer, the plumping and
sucking noise of empty buckets plunged into a full stream; and finally
the sound of many feet around the fire.  But all this was less to him
than the fact that the red rent, which had lately once more increased,
had once more slightly diminished.

     Then came a cry that very nearly made him turn his head.
Flambeau and Fanshaw, now reinforced by some of the gipsies,
had rushed after the mysterious man by the house; and he heard from
the other end of the garden the Frenchman's cry of horror and astonishment.
It was echoed by a howl not to be called human, as the being broke
from their hold and ran along the garden.  Three times at least
it raced round the whole island, in a way that was as horrible as
the chase of a lunatic, both in the cries of the pursued and the ropes
carried by the pursuers; but was more horrible still, because it somehow
suggested one of the chasing games of children in a garden.
Then, finding them closing in on every side, the figure sprang upon
one of the higher river banks and disappeared with a splash
into the dark and driving river.

     "You can do no more, I fear," said Brown in a voice cold with pain.
"He has been washed down to the rocks by now, where he has sent
so many others.  He knew the use of a family legend."

     "Oh, don't talk in these parables," cried Flambeau impatiently.
"Can't you put it simply in words of one syllable?"

     "Yes," answered Brown, with his eye on the hose.  "`Both eyes bright,
she's all right; one eye blinks, down she sinks.'"

     The fire hissed and shrieked more and more, like a strangled thing,
as it grew narrower and narrower under the flood from the pipe and buckets,
but Father Brown still kept his eye on it as he went on speaking:

     "I thought of asking this young lady, if it were morning yet,
to look through that telescope at the river mouth and the river.
She might have seen something to interest her:  the sign of the ship,
or Mr Walter Pendragon coming home, and perhaps even the sign of
the half-man, for though he is certainly safe by now, he may very well
have waded ashore.  He has been within a shave of another shipwreck;
and would never have escaped it, if the lady hadn't had the sense
to suspect the old Admiral's telegram and come down to watch him.
Don't let's talk about the old Admiral.  Don't let's talk about anything.
It's enough to say that whenever this tower, with its pitch and resin-wood,
really caught fire, the spark on the horizon always looked like
the twin light to the coast light-house."

     "And that," said Flambeau, "is how the father and brother died.
The wicked uncle of the legends very nearly got his estate after all."

     Father Brown did not answer; indeed, he did not speak again,
save for civilities, till they were all safe round a cigar-box in
the cabin of the yacht.  He saw that the frustrated fire was extinguished;
and then refused to linger, though he actually heard young Pendragon,
escorted by an enthusiastic crowd, come tramping up the river bank;
and might (had he been moved by romantic curiosities) have received
the combined thanks of the man from the ship and the girl from the canoe.
But his fatigue had fallen on him once more, and he only started once,
when Flambeau abruptly told him he had dropped cigar-ash on his trousers.

     "That's no cigar-ash," he said rather wearily.  "That's from the fire,
but you don't think so because you're all smoking cigars.
That's just the way I got my first faint suspicion about the chart."

     "Do you mean Pendragon's chart of his Pacific Islands?" asked Fanshaw.

     "You thought it was a chart of the Pacific Islands," answered Brown.
"Put a feather with a fossil and a bit of coral and everyone will
think it's a specimen.  Put the same feather with a ribbon and
an artificial flower and everyone will think it's for a lady's hat.
Put the same feather with an ink-bottle, a book and a stack
of writing-paper, and most men will swear they've seen a quill pen.
So you saw that map among tropic birds and shells and thought it was
a map of Pacific Islands.  It was the map of this river."

     "But how do you know?" asked Fanshaw.

     "I saw the rock you thought was like a dragon, and the one
like Merlin, and--"

     "You seem to have noticed a lot as we came in," cried Fanshaw.
"We thought you were rather abstracted."

     "I was sea-sick," said Father Brown simply.  "I felt simply horrible.
But feeling horrible has nothing to do with not seeing things."
And he closed his eyes.

     "Do you think most men would have seen that?" asked Flambeau.
He received no answer:  Father Brown was asleep.




IX. The God of the Gongs


IT was one of those chilly and empty afternoons in early winter,
when the daylight is silver rather than gold and pewter rather than silver.
If it was dreary in a hundred bleak offices and yawning drawing-rooms,
it was drearier still along the edges of the flat Essex coast,
where the monotony was the more inhuman for being broken
at very long intervals by a lamp-post that looked less civilized
than a tree, or a tree that looked more ugly than a lamp-post.
A light fall of snow had half-melted into a few strips, also looking leaden
rather than silver, when it had been fixed again by the seal of frost;
no fresh snow had fallen, but a ribbon of the old snow ran along
the very margin of the coast, so as to parallel the pale ribbon of the foam.

     The line of the sea looked frozen in the very vividness of
its violet-blue, like the vein of a frozen finger.  For miles and miles,
forward and back, there was no breathing soul, save two pedestrians,
walking at a brisk pace, though one had much longer legs and took
much longer strides than the other.

     It did not seem a very appropriate place or time for a holiday,
but Father Brown had few holidays, and had to take them when he could,
and he always preferred, if possible, to take them in company with
his old friend Flambeau, ex-criminal and ex-detective.  The priest had
had a fancy for visiting his old parish at Cobhole, and was going
north-eastward along the coast.

     After walking a mile or two farther, they found that the shore was
beginning to be formally embanked, so as to form something like a parade;
the ugly lamp-posts became less few and far between and more ornamental,
though quite equally ugly.  Half a mile farther on Father Brown
was puzzled first by little labyrinths of flowerless flower-pots,
covered with the low, flat, quiet-coloured plants that look less like
a garden than a tessellated pavement, between weak curly paths studded
with seats with curly backs.  He faintly sniffed the atmosphere of
a certain sort of seaside town that be did not specially care about,
and, looking ahead along the parade by the sea, he saw something that
put the matter beyond a doubt.  In the grey distance the big bandstand
of a watering-place stood up like a giant mushroom with six legs.

     "I suppose," said Father Brown, turning up his coat-collar
and drawing a woollen scarf rather closer round his neck,
"that we are approaching a pleasure resort."

     "I fear," answered Flambeau, "a pleasure resort to which
few people just now have the pleasure of resorting.  They try to
revive these places in the winter, but it never succeeds except with
Brighton and the old ones.  This must be Seawood, I think--
Lord Pooley's experiment; he had the Sicilian Singers down at Christmas,
and there's talk about holding one of the great glove-fights here.
But they'll have to chuck the rotten place into the sea;
it's as dreary as a lost railway-carriage."

     They had come under the big bandstand, and the priest was
looking up at it with a curiosity that had something rather odd about it,
his head a little on one side, like a bird's.  It was the conventional,
rather tawdry kind of erection for its purpose:  a flattened dome
or canopy, gilt here and there, and lifted on six slender pillars
of painted wood, the whole being raised about five feet above the parade
on a round wooden platform like a drum.  But there was something
fantastic about the snow combined with something artificial about
the gold that haunted Flambeau as well as his friend with
some association he could not capture, but which he knew was at once
artistic and alien.

     "I've got it," he said at last.  "It's Japanese.  It's like
those fanciful Japanese prints, where the snow on the mountain
looks like sugar, and the gilt on the pagodas is like gilt on gingerbread.
It looks just like a little pagan temple."

     "Yes," said Father Brown.  "Let's have a look at the god."
And with an agility hardly to be expected of him, he hopped up
on to the raised platform.

     "Oh, very well," said Flambeau, laughing; and the next instant
his own towering figure was visible on that quaint elevation.

     Slight as was the difference of height, it gave in those level wastes
a sense of seeing yet farther and farther across land and sea.
Inland the little wintry gardens faded into a confused grey copse;
beyond that, in the distance, were long low barns of a lonely farmhouse,
and beyond that nothing but the long East Anglian plains.
Seawards there was no sail or sign of life save a few seagulls:
and even they looked like the last snowflakes, and seemed to float
rather than fly.

     Flambeau turned abruptly at an exclamation behind him.
It seemed to come from lower down than might have been expected,
and to be addressed to his heels rather than his head.  He instantly
held out his hand, but he could hardly help laughing at what he saw.
For some reason or other the platform had given way under Father Brown,
and the unfortunate little man had dropped through to the level
of the parade.  He was just tall enough, or short enough,
for his head alone to stick out of the hole in the broken wood,
looking like St John the Baptist's head on a charger.  The face wore
a disconcerted expression, as did, perhaps, that of St John the Baptist.

     In a moment he began to laugh a little.  "This wood must be rotten,"
said Flambeau.  "Though it seems odd it should bear me, and you go through
the weak place.  Let me help you out."

     But the little priest was looking rather curiously at the corners
and edges of the wood alleged to be rotten, and there was a sort of trouble
on his brow.

     "Come along," cried Flambeau impatiently, still with his big
brown hand extended.  "Don't you want to get out?"

     The priest was holding a splinter of the broken wood between
his finger and thumb, and did not immediately reply.  At last he said
thoughtfully:  "Want to get out?  Why, no.  I rather think I want
to get in." And he dived into the darkness under the wooden floor
so abruptly as to knock off his big curved clerical hat and leave it
lying on the boards above, without any clerical head in it.

     Flambeau looked once more inland and out to sea, and once more
could see nothing but seas as wintry as the snow, and snows as level
as the sea.

     There came a scurrying noise behind him, and the little priest
came scrambling out of the hole faster than he had fallen in.
His face was no longer disconcerted, but rather resolute, and,
perhaps only through the reflections of the snow, a trifle paler than usual.


     "Well?" asked his tall friend.  "Have you found the god
of the temple?"

     "No," answered Father Brown.  "I have found what was sometimes
more important.  The Sacrifice."

     "What the devil do you mean?" cried Flambeau, quite alarmed.

     Father Brown did not answer.  He was staring, with a knot
in his forehead, at the landscape; and he suddenly pointed at it.
"What's that house over there?" he asked.

     Following his finger, Flambeau saw for the first time the corners
of a building nearer than the farmhouse, but screened for the most part
with a fringe of trees.  It was not a large building, and stood well back
from the shore--, but a glint of ornament on it suggested that it was
part of the same watering-place scheme of decoration as the bandstand,
the little gardens and the curly-backed iron seats.

     Father Brown jumped off the bandstand, his friend following;
and as they walked in the direction indicated the trees fell away
to right and left, and they saw a small, rather flashy hotel,
such as is common in resorts--the hotel of the Saloon Bar rather than
the Bar Parlour.  Almost the whole frontage was of gilt plaster and
figured glass, and between that grey seascape and the grey,
witch-like trees, its gimcrack quality had something spectral
in its melancholy.  They both felt vaguely that if any food or drink
were offered at such a hostelry, it would be the paste-board ham
and empty mug of the pantomime.

     In this, however, they were not altogether confirmed.  As they drew
nearer and nearer to the place they saw in front of the buffet,
which was apparently closed, one of the iron garden-seats with curly backs
that had adorned the gardens, but much longer, running almost
the whole length of the frontage.  Presumably, it was placed so that
visitors might sit there and look at the sea, but one hardly expected
to find anyone doing it in such weather.

     Nevertheless, just in front of the extreme end of the iron seat
stood a small round restaurant table, and on this stood
a small bottle of Chablis and a plate of almonds and raisins.
Behind the table and on the seat sat a dark-haired young man,
bareheaded, and gazing at the sea in a state of almost
astonishing immobility.

     But though he might have been a waxwork when they were within
four yards of him, he jumped up like a jack-in-the-box when they
came within three, and said in a deferential, though not undignified,
manner:  "Will you step inside, gentlemen?  I have no staff at present,
but I can get you anything simple myself."

     "Much obliged," said Flambeau.  "So you are the proprietor?"

     "Yes," said the dark man, dropping back a little into
his motionless manner.  "My waiters are all Italians, you see,
and I thought it only fair they should see their countryman beat the black,
if he really can do it.  You know the great fight between Malvoli and
Nigger Ned is coming off after all?"

     "I'm afraid we can't wait to trouble your hospitality seriously,"
said Father Brown.  "But my friend would be glad of a glass of sherry,
I'm sure, to keep out the cold and drink success to the Latin champion."

     Flambeau did not understand the sherry, but he did not object to it
in the least.  He could only say amiably:  "Oh, thank you very much."

     "Sherry, sir--certainly," said their host, turning to his hostel.
"Excuse me if I detain you a few minutes.  As I told you,
I have no staff--" And he went towards the black windows of
his shuttered and unlighted inn.

     "Oh, it doesn't really matter," began Flambeau, but the man
turned to reassure him.

     "I have the keys," he said.  "I could find my way in the dark."

     "I didn't mean--" began Father Brown.

     He was interrupted by a bellowing human voice that came
out of the bowels of the uninhabited hotel.  It thundered
some foreign name loudly but inaudibly, and the hotel proprietor
moved more sharply towards it than he had done for Flambeau's sherry.
As instant evidence proved, the proprietor had told, then and after,
nothing but the literal truth.  But both Flambeau and Father Brown
have often confessed that, in all their (often outrageous) adventures,
nothing had so chilled their blood as that voice of an ogre,
sounding suddenly out of a silent and empty inn.

     "My cook!" cried the proprietor hastily.  "I had forgotten my cook.
He will be starting presently.  Sherry, sir?"

     And, sure enough, there appeared in the doorway a big white bulk
with white cap and white apron, as befits a cook, but with
the needless emphasis of a black face.  Flambeau had often heard
that negroes made good cooks.  But somehow something in the contrast
of colour and caste increased his surprise that the hotel proprietor
should answer the call of the cook, and not the cook the call
of the proprietor.  But he reflected that head cooks are proverbially
arrogant; and, besides, the host had come back with the sherry,
and that was the great thing.

     "I rather wonder," said Father Brown, "that there are so few people
about the beach, when this big fight is coming on after all.
We only met one man for miles."

     The hotel proprietor shrugged his shoulders.  "They come from
the other end of the town, you see--from the station, three miles from here.
They are only interested in the sport, and will stop in hotels
for the night only.  After all, it is hardly weather for
basking on the shore."

     "Or on the seat," said Flambeau, and pointed to the little table.

     "I have to keep a look-out," said the man with the motionless face.
He was a quiet, well-featured fellow, rather sallow; his dark clothes
had nothing distinctive about them, except that his black necktie
was worn rather high, like a stock, and secured by a gold pin
with some grotesque head to it.  Nor was there anything notable
in the face, except something that was probably a mere nervous trick--
a habit of opening one eye more narrowly than the other,
giving the impression that the other was larger, or was,
perhaps, artificial.

     The silence that ensued was broken by their host saying quietly:
"Whereabouts did you meet the one man on your march?"

     "Curiously enough," answered the priest, "close by here--
just by that bandstand."

     Flambeau, who had sat on the long iron seat to finish his sherry,
put it down and rose to his feet, staring at his friend in amazement.
He opened his mouth to speak, and then shut it again.

     "Curious," said the dark-haired man thoughtfully.  "What was he like?"

     "It was rather dark when I saw him," began Father Brown,
"but he was--"

     As has been said, the hotel-keeper can be proved to have told
the precise truth.  His phrase that the cook was starting presently
was fulfilled to the letter, for the cook came out, pulling his gloves on,
even as they spoke.

     But he was a very different figure from the confused mass
of white and black that had appeared for an instant in the doorway.
He was buttoned and buckled up to his bursting eyeballs in the most
brilliant fashion.  A tall black hat was tilted on his broad black head--
a hat of the sort that the French wit has compared to eight mirrors.
But somehow the black man was like the black hat.  He also was black,
and yet his glossy skin flung back the light at eight angles or more.
It is needless to say that he wore white spats and a white slip inside
his waistcoat.  The red flower stood up in his buttonhole aggressively,
as if it had suddenly grown there.  And in the way he carried his cane
in one hand and his cigar in the other there was a certain attitude--
an attitude we must always remember when we talk of racial prejudices:
something innocent and insolent--the cake walk.

     "Sometimes," said Flambeau, looking after him, "I'm not surprised
that they lynch them."

     "I am never surprised," said Father Brown, "at any work of hell.
But as I was saying," he resumed, as the negro, still ostentatiously
pulling on his yellow gloves, betook himself briskly towards
the watering-place, a queer music-hall figure against that grey and
frosty scene--"as I was saying, I couldn't describe the man very minutely,
but he had a flourish and old-fashioned whiskers and moustachios,
dark or dyed, as in the pictures of foreign financiers, round his neck
was wrapped a long purple scarf that thrashed out in the wind as he walked.
It was fixed at the throat rather in the way that nurses
fix children's comforters with a safety-pin.  Only this,"
added the priest, gazing placidly out to sea, "was not a safety-pin."

     The man sitting on the long iron bench was also gazing placidly
out to sea.  Now he was once more in repose.  Flambeau felt quite certain
that one of his eyes was naturally larger than the other.
Both were now well opened, and he could almost fancy the left eye
grew larger as he gazed.

     "It was a very long gold pin, and had the carved head of a monkey
or some such thing," continued the cleric; "and it was fixed
in a rather odd way--he wore pince-nez and a broad black--"

     The motionless man continued to gaze at the sea, and the eyes in
his head might have belonged to two different men.  Then he made
a movement of blinding swiftness.

     Father Brown had his back to him, and in that flash might have
fallen dead on his face.  Flambeau had no weapon, but his large
brown hands were resting on the end of the long iron seat.
His shoulders abruptly altered their shape, and he heaved
the whole huge thing high over his head, like a headsman's axe
about to fall.  The mere height of the thing, as he held it vertical,
looked like a long iron ladder by which he was inviting men to climb
towards the stars.  But the long shadow, in the level evening light,
looked like a giant brandishing the Eiffel Tower.  It was the shock
of that shadow, before the shock of the iron crash, that made the stranger
quail and dodge, and then dart into his inn, leaving the flat and
shining dagger he had dropped exactly where it had fallen.

     "We must get away from here instantly," cried Flambeau,
flinging the huge seat away with furious indifference on the beach.
He caught the little priest by the elbow and ran him down
a grey perspective of barren back garden, at the end of which there
was a closed back garden door.  Flambeau bent over it an instant
in violent silence, and then said:  "The door is locked."

     As he spoke a black feather from one of the ornamental firs fell,
brushing the brim of his hat.  It startled him more than the small
and distant detonation that had come just before.  Then came another
distant detonation, and the door he was trying to open shook
under the bullet buried in it.  Flambeau's shoulders again filled out
and altered suddenly.  Three hinges and a lock burst at the same instant,
and he went out into the empty path behind, carrying the great garden door
with him, as Samson carried the gates of Gaza.

     Then he flung the garden door over the garden wall, just as
a third shot picked up a spurt of snow and dust behind his heel.
Without ceremony he snatched up the little priest, slung him astraddle
on his shoulders, and went racing towards Seawood as fast as
his long legs could carry him.  It was not until nearly two miles
farther on that he set his small companion down.  It had hardly been
a dignified escape, in spite of the classic model of Anchises,
but Father Brown's face only wore a broad grin.

     "Well," said Flambeau, after an impatient silence, as they resumed
their more conventional tramp through the streets on the edge of the town,
where no outrage need be feared, "I don't know what all this means,
but I take it I may trust my own eyes that you never met the man
you have so accurately described."

     "I did meet him in a way," Brown said, biting his finger
rather nervously--"I did really.  And it was too dark to see him properly,
because it was under that bandstand affair.  But I'm afraid I didn't
describe him so very accurately after all, for his pince-nez
was broken under him, and the long gold pin wasn't stuck through
his purple scarf but through his heart."

     "And I suppose," said the other in a lower voice, "that glass-eyed guy
had something to do with it."

     "I had hoped he had only a little," answered Brown
in a rather troubled voice, "and I may have been wrong in what I did.
I acted on impulse.  But I fear this business has deep roots and dark."

     They walked on through some streets in silence.  The yellow lamps
were beginning to be lit in the cold blue twilight, and they were
evidently approaching the more central parts of the town.
Highly coloured bills announcing the glove-fight between Nigger Ned
and Malvoli were slapped about the walls.

     "Well," said Flambeau, "I never murdered anyone, even in
my criminal days, but I can almost sympathize with anyone doing it
in such a dreary place.  Of all God-forsaken dustbins of Nature,
I think the most heart-breaking are places like that bandstand,
that were meant to be festive and are forlorn.  I can fancy a morbid man
feeling he must kill his rival in the solitude and irony of such a scene.
I remember once taking a tramp in your glorious Surrey hills,
thinking of nothing but gorse and skylarks, when I came out on
a vast circle of land, and over me lifted a vast, voiceless structure,
tier above tier of seats, as huge as a Roman amphitheatre and as empty
as a new letter-rack.  A bird sailed in heaven over it.  It was
the Grand Stand at Epsom.  And I felt that no one would ever
be happy there again."

     "It's odd you should mention Epsom," said the priest.
"Do you remember what was called the Sutton Mystery, because two
suspected men--ice-cream men, I think--happened to live at Sutton?
They were eventually released.  A man was found strangled, it was said,
on the Downs round that part.  As a fact, I know (from an Irish policeman
who is a friend of mine) that he was found close up to the Epsom
Grand Stand--in fact, only hidden by one of the lower doors being
pushed back."

     "That is queer," assented Flambeau.  "But it rather confirms
my view that such pleasure places look awfully lonely out of season,
or the man wouldn't have been murdered there."

     "I'm not so sure he--" began Brown, and stopped.

     "Not so sure he was murdered?" queried his companion.

     "Not so sure he was murdered out of the season," answered
the little priest, with simplicity.  "Don't you think there's something
rather tricky about this solitude, Flambeau?  Do you feel sure
a wise murderer would always want the spot to be lonely?
It's very, very seldom a man is quite alone.  And, short of that,
the more alone he is, the more certain he is to be seen.
No; I think there must be some other--Why, here we are at
the Pavilion or Palace, or whatever they call it."

     They had emerged on a small square, brilliantly lighted,
of which the principal building was gay with gilding, gaudy with posters,
and flanked with two giant photographs of Malvoli and Nigger Ned.

     "Hallo!" cried Flambeau in great surprise, as his clerical friend
stumped straight up the broad steps.  "I didn't know pugilism was
your latest hobby.  Are you going to see the fight?"

     "I don't think there will be any fight," replied Father Brown.

     They passed rapidly through ante-rooms and inner rooms;
they passed through the hall of combat itself, raised, roped,
and padded with innumerable seats and boxes, and still the cleric did
not look round or pause till he came to a clerk at a desk outside
a door marked "Committee".  There he stopped and asked to see Lord Pooley.

     The attendant observed that his lordship was very busy,
as the fight was coming on soon, but Father Brown had a good-tempered
tedium of reiteration for which the official mind is generally not prepared.
In a few moments the rather baffled Flambeau found himself in the presence
of a man who was still shouting directions to another man going out of
the room.  "Be careful, you know, about the ropes after the fourth--
Well, and what do you want, I wonder!"

     Lord Pooley was a gentleman, and, like most of the few remaining
to our race, was worried--especially about money.  He was half grey
and half flaxen, and he had the eyes of fever and a high-bridged,
frost-bitten nose.

     "Only a word," said Father Brown.  "I have come to prevent
a man being killed."

     Lord Pooley bounded off his chair as if a spring had
flung him from it.  "I'm damned if I'll stand any more of this!"
he cried.  "You and your committees and parsons and petitions!
Weren't there parsons in the old days, when they fought without gloves?
Now they're fighting with the regulation gloves, and there's not
the rag of a possibility of either of the boxers being killed."

     "I didn't mean either of the boxers," said the little priest.

     "Well, well, well!" said the nobleman, with a touch of frosty humour.
"Who's going to be killed?  The referee?"

     "I don't know who's going to be killed," replied Father Brown,
with a reflective stare.  "If I did I shouldn't have to
spoil your pleasure.  I could simply get him to escape.
I never could see anything wrong about prize-fights.  As it is,
I must ask you to announce that the fight is off for the present."

     "Anything else?" jeered the gentleman with feverish eyes.
"And what do you say to the two thousand people who have come to see it?"

     "I say there will be one thousand nine-hundred and ninety-nine
of them left alive when they have seen it," said Father Brown.

     Lord Pooley looked at Flambeau.  "Is your friend mad?" he asked.

     "Far from it," was the reply.

     "And took here," resumed Pooley in his restless way,
"it's worse than that.  A whole pack of Italians have turned up
to back Malvoli--swarthy, savage fellows of some country, anyhow.
You know what these Mediterranean races are like.  If I send out word
that it's off we shall have Malvoli storming in here at the head of
a whole Corsican clan."

     "My lord, it is a matter of life and death," said the priest.
"Ring your bell.  Give your message.  And see whether it is Malvoli
who answers."

     The nobleman struck the bell on the table with an odd air
of new curiosity.  He said to the clerk who appeared almost instantly
in the doorway:  "I have a serious announcement to make to the audience
shortly.  Meanwhile, would you kindly tell the two champions that
the fight will have to be put off."

     The clerk stared for some seconds as if at a demon and vanished.

     "What authority have you for what you say?" asked Lord Pooley
abruptly.  "Whom did you consult?"

     "I consulted a bandstand," said Father Brown, scratching his head.
"But, no, I'm wrong; I consulted a book, too.  I  picked it up
on a bookstall in London--very cheap, too."

     He had taken out of his pocket a small, stout, leather-bound volume,
and Flambeau, looking over his shoulder, could see that it was some
book of old travels, and had a leaf turned down for reference.

     "`The only form in which Voodoo--'" began Father Brown, reading aloud.

     "In which what?" inquired his lordship.

     "`In which Voodoo,'" repeated the reader, almost with relish,
"`is widely organized outside Jamaica itself is in the form known as
the Monkey, or the God of the Gongs, which is powerful in many parts of
the two American continents, especially among half-breeds, many of whom
look exactly like white men.  It differs from most other forms
of devil-worship and human sacrifice in the fact that the blood
is not shed formally on the altar, but by a sort of assassination
among the crowd.  The gongs beat with a deafening din as
the doors of the shrine open and the monkey-god is revealed;
almost the whole congregation rivet ecstatic eyes on him.  But after--'"

     The door of the room was flung open, and the fashionable negro
stood framed in it, his eyeballs rolling, his silk hat still insolently
tilted on his head.  "Huh!" he cried, showing his apish teeth.
"What this?  Huh!  Huh!  You steal a coloured gentleman's prize--
prize his already--yo' think yo' jes' save that white 'Talian trash--"

     "The matter is only deferred," said the nobleman quietly.
"I will be with you to explain in a minute or two."

     "Who you to--" shouted Nigger Ned, beginning to storm.

     "My name is Pooley," replied the other, with a creditable coolness.
"I am the organizing secretary, and I advise you just now
to leave the room."

     "Who this fellow?" demanded the dark champion, pointing to the
priest disdainfully.

     "My name is Brown," was the reply.  "And I advise you just now
to leave the country."

     The prize-fighter stood glaring for a few seconds, and then,
rather to the surprise of Flambeau and the others, strode out,
sending the door to with a crash behind him.

     "Well," asked Father Brown rubbing his dusty hair up,
"what do you think of Leonardo da Vinci?  A beautiful Italian head."

     "Look here," said Lord Pooley, "I've taken a considerable responsibility,
on your bare word.  I think you ought to tell me more about this."

     "You are quite right, my lord," answered Brown.  "And it won't take
long to tell." He put the little leather book in his overcoat pocket.
"I think we know all that this can tell us, but you shall look at it
to see if I'm right.  That negro who has just swaggered out is one of
the most dangerous men on earth, for he has the brains of a European,
with the instincts of a cannibal.  He has turned what was clean,
common-sense butchery among his fellow-barbarians into a very modern
and scientific secret society of assassins.  He doesn't know I know it,
nor, for the matter of that, that I can't prove it."

     There was a silence, and the little man went on.

     "But if I want to murder somebody, will it really be the best plan
to make sure I'm alone with him?"

     Lord Pooley's eyes recovered their frosty twinkle as he
looked at the little clergyman.  He only said:  "If you want to
murder somebody, I should advise it."

     Father Brown shook his head, like a murderer of much riper experience.
"So Flambeau said," he replied, with a sigh.  "But consider.
The more a man feels lonely the less he can be sure he is alone.
It must mean empty spaces round him, and they are just what
make him obvious.  Have you never seen one ploughman from the heights,
or one shepherd from the valleys? Have you never walked along a cliff,
and seen one man walking along the sands?  Didn't you know when he's
killed a crab, and wouldn't you have known if it had been a creditor?
No! No! No!  For an intelligent murderer, such as you or I might be,
it is an impossible plan to make sure that nobody is looking at you."

     "But what other plan is there?"

     "There is only one," said the priest.  "To make sure
that everybody is looking at something else.  A man is throttled
close by the big stand at Epsom.  Anybody might have seen it done
while the stand stood empty--any tramp under the hedges or motorist
among the hills.  But nobody would have seen it when the stand
was crowded and the whole ring roaring, when the favourite was
coming in first--or wasn't.  The twisting of a neck-cloth,
the thrusting of a body behind a door could be done in an instant--
so long as it was that instant.  It was the same, of course,"
he continued turning to Flambeau, "with that poor fellow
under the bandstand.  He was dropped through the hole (it wasn't
an accidental hole) just at some very dramatic moment of the entertainment,
when the bow of some great violinist or the voice of some great singer
opened or came to its climax.  And here, of course, when the knock-out
blow came--it would not be the only one.  That is the little trick
Nigger Ned has adopted from his old God of Gongs."

     "By the way, Malvoli--" Pooley began.

     "Malvoli," said the priest, "has nothing to do with it.
I dare say he has some Italians with him, but our amiable friends
are not Italians.  They are octoroons and African half-bloods
of various shades, but I fear we English think all foreigners
are much the same so long as they are dark and dirty.  Also,"
he added, with a smile, "I fear the English decline to draw
any fine distinction between the moral character produced by my religion
and that which blooms out of Voodoo."

     The blaze of the spring season had burst upon Seawood,
littering its foreshore with famines and bathing-machines,
with nomadic preachers and nigger minstrels, before the two friends
saw it again, and long before the storm of pursuit after the strange
secret society had died away.  Almost on every hand the secret
of their purpose perished with them.  The man of the hotel was found
drifting dead on the sea like so much seaweed; his right eye was
closed in peace, but his left eye was wide open, and glistened like glass
in the moon.  Nigger Ned had been overtaken a mile or two away,
and murdered three policemen with his closed left hand.
The remaining officer was surprised--nay, pained--and the negro got away.
But this was enough to set all the English papers in a flame,
and for a month or two the main purpose of the British Empire was
to prevent the buck nigger (who was so in both senses) escaping by any
English port.  Persons of a figure remotely reconcilable with his
were subjected to quite extraordinary inquisitions, made to scrub
their faces before going on board ship, as if each white complexion
were made up like a mask, of greasepaint.  Every negro in England
was put under special regulations and made to report himself;
the outgoing ships would no more have taken a nigger than a basilisk.
For people had found out how fearful and vast and silent was
the force of the savage secret society, and by the time Flambeau and
Father Brown were leaning on the parade parapet in April, the Black Man
meant in England almost what he once meant in Scotland.

     "He must be still in England," observed Flambeau, "and horridly
well hidden, too.  They must have found him at the ports if he had
only whitened his face."

     "You see, he is really a clever man," said Father Brown
apologetically.  "And I'm sure he wouldn't whiten his face."

     "Well, but what would he do?"

     "I think," said Father Brown, "he would blacken his face."

     Flambeau, leaning motionless on the parapet, laughed and said:
"My dear fellow!"

     Father Brown, also leaning motionless on the parapet, moved one finger
for an instant into the direction of the soot-masked niggers singing
on the sands.




X. The Salad of Colonel Cray


FATHER BROWN was walking home from Mass on a white weird morning
when the mists were slowly lifting--one of those mornings when
the very element of light appears as something mysterious and new.
The scattered trees outlined themselves more and more out of the vapour,
as if they were first drawn in grey chalk and then in charcoal.
At yet more distant intervals appeared the houses upon the broken fringe
of the suburb; their outlines became clearer and clearer until
he recognized many in which he had chance acquaintances, and many more
the names of whose owners he knew.  But all the windows and doors
were sealed; none of the people were of the sort that would be up
at such a time, or still less on such an errand.  But as he passed under
the shadow of one handsome villa with verandas and wide ornate gardens,
he heard a noise that made him almost involuntarily stop.
It was the unmistakable noise of a pistol or carbine or some
light firearm discharged; but it was not this that puzzled him most.
The first full noise was immediately followed by a series of fainter noises--
as he counted them, about six.  He supposed it must be the echo;
but the odd thing was that the echo was not in the least like
the original sound.  It was not like anything else that he could think of;
the three things nearest to it seemed to be the noise made by
siphons of soda-water, one of the many noises made by an animal,
and the noise made by a person attempting to conceal laughter.
None of which seemed to make much sense.

     Father Brown was made of two men.  There was a man of action,
who was as modest as a primrose and as punctual as a clock;
who went his small round of duties and never dreamed of altering it.
There was also a man of reflection, who was much simpler but much stronger,
who could not easily be stopped; whose thought was always (in the only
intelligent sense of the words) free thought.  He could not help,
even unconsciously, asking himself all the questions that
there were to be asked, and answering as many of them as he could;
all that went on like his breathing or circulation.  But he never
consciously carried his actions outside the sphere of his own duty;
and in this case the two attitudes were aptly tested.  He was just about
to resume his trudge in the twilight, telling himself it was no affair
of his, but instinctively twisting and untwisting twenty theories
about what the odd noises might mean.  Then the grey sky-line
brightened into silver, and in the broadening light he realized
that he had been to the house which belonged to an Anglo-Indian Major
named Putnam; and that the Major had a native cook from Malta who was
of his communion.  He also began to remember that pistol-shots
are sometimes serious things; accompanied with consequences with which
he was legitimately concerned.  He turned back and went in
at the garden gate, making for the front door.

     Half-way down one side of the house stood out a projection
like a very low shed; it was, as he afterwards discovered,
a large dustbin.  Round the corner of this came a figure,
at first a mere shadow in the haze, apparently bending and peering about.
Then, coming nearer, it solidified into a figure that was, indeed,
rather unusually solid.  Major Putnam was a bald-headed, bull-necked man,
short and very broad, with one of those rather apoplectic faces
that are produced by a prolonged attempt to combine the oriental climate
with the occidental luxuries.  But the face was a good-humoured one,
and even now, though evidently puzzled and inquisitive, wore a kind of
innocent grin.  He had a large palm-leaf hat on the back of his head
(suggesting a halo that was by no means appropriate to the face),
but otherwise he was clad only in a very vivid suit of striped scarlet
and yellow pyjamas; which, though glowing enough to behold, must have been,
on a fresh morning, pretty chilly to wear.  He had evidently
come out of his house in a hurry, and the priest was not surprised
when he called out without further ceremony:  "Did you hear that noise?"

     "Yes," answered Father Brown; "I thought I had better look in,
in case anything was the matter."

     The Major looked at him rather queerly with his good-humoured
gooseberry eyes.  "What do you think the noise was?" he asked.

     "It sounded like a gun or something," replied the other,
with some hesitation; "but it seemed to have a singular sort of echo."

     The Major was still looking at him quietly, but with protruding eyes,
when the front door was flung open, releasing a flood of gaslight
on the face of the fading mist; and another figure in pyjamas sprang
or tumbled out into the garden.  The figure was much longer, leaner,
and more athletic; the pyjamas, though equally tropical, were
comparatively tasteful, being of white with a light lemon-yellow stripe.
The man was haggard, but handsome, more sunburned than the other;
he had an aquiline profile and rather deep-sunken eyes, and a slight air
of oddity arising from the combination of coal-black hair with
a much lighter moustache.  All this Father Brown absorbed in detail
more at leisure.  For the moment he only saw one thing about the man;
which was the revolver in his hand.

     "Cray!" exclaimed the Major, staring at him; "did you fire that shot?"

     "Yes, I did," retorted the black-haired gentleman hotly;
"and so would you in my place.  If you were chased everywhere
by devils and nearly--"

     The Major seemed to intervene rather hurriedly.  "This is my friend
Father Brown," he said.  And then to Brown:  "I don't know whether
you've met Colonel Cray of the Royal Artillery."

     "I have heard of him, of course," said the priest innocently.
"Did you--did you hit anything?"

     "I thought so," answered Cray with gravity.

     "Did he--" asked Major Putnam in a lowered voice, "did he fall
or cry out, or anything?"

     Colonel Cray was regarding his host with a strange and steady stare.
"I'll tell you exactly what he did," he said.  "He sneezed."

     Father Brown's hand went half-way to his head, with the gesture
of a man remembering somebody's name.  He knew now what it was
that was neither soda-water nor the snorting of a dog.

     "Well," ejaculated the staring Major, "I never heard before
that a service revolver was a thing to be sneezed at."

     "Nor I," said Father Brown faintly.  "It's lucky you didn't
turn your artillery on him or you might have given him quite a bad cold."
Then, after a bewildered pause, he said:  "Was it a burglar?"

     "Let us go inside," said Major Putnam, rather sharply,
and led the way into his house.

     The interior exhibited a paradox often to be marked in such
morning hours:  that the rooms seemed brighter than the sky outside;
even after the Major had turned out the one gaslight in the front hall.
Father Brown was surprised to see the whole dining-table set out
as for a festive meal, with napkins in their rings, and wine-glasses
of some six unnecessary shapes set beside every plate.  It was common enough,
at that time of the morning, to find the remains of a banquet over-night;
but to find it freshly spread so early was unusual.

     While he stood wavering in the hall Major Putnam rushed past him
and sent a raging eye over the whole oblong of the tablecloth.
At last he spoke, spluttering:  "All the silver gone!" he gasped.
"Fish-knives and forks gone.  Old cruet-stand gone.  Even the old silver
cream-jug gone.  And now, Father Brown, I am ready to answer your question
of whether it was a burglar."

     "They're simply a blind," said Cray stubbornly.  "I know better
than you why people persecute this house; I know better than you why--"

     The Major patted him on the shoulder with a gesture almost peculiar
to the soothing of a sick child, and said:  "It was a burglar.
Obviously it was a burglar."

     "A burglar with a bad cold," observed Father Brown, "that might
assist you to trace him in the neighbourhood."

     The Major shook his head in a sombre manner.  "He must be far beyond
trace now, I fear," he said.

     Then, as the restless man with the revolver turned again towards
the door in the garden, he added in a husky, confidential voice:
"I doubt whether I should send for the police, for fear my friend here
has been a little too free with his bullets, and got on the wrong side
of the law.  He's lived in very wild places; and, to be frank with you,
I think he sometimes fancies things."

     "I think you once told me," said Brown, "that he believes some
Indian secret society is pursuing him."

     Major Putnam nodded, but at the same time shrugged his shoulders.
"I suppose we'd better follow him outside," he said.  "I don't want
any more--shall we say, sneezing?"

     They passed out into the morning light, which was now even tinged
with sunshine, and saw Colonel Cray's tall figure bent almost double,
minutely examining the condition of gravel and grass.  While the Major
strolled unobtrusively towards him, the priest took an equally
indolent turn, which took him round the next corner of the house
to within a yard or two of the projecting dustbin.

     He stood regarding this dismal object for some minute and a half--,
then he stepped towards it, lifted the lid and put his head inside.
Dust and other discolouring matter shook upwards as he did so;
but Father Brown never observed his own appearance, whatever else
he observed.  He remained thus for a measurable period, as if engaged
in some mysterious prayers.  Then he came out again, with some ashes
on his hair, and walked unconcernedly away.

     By the time he came round to the garden door again he found
a group there which seemed to roll away morbidities as the sunlight
had already rolled away the mists.  It was in no way rationally reassuring;
it was simply broadly comic, like a cluster of Dickens's characters.
Major Putnam had managed to slip inside and plunge into a proper shirt and
trousers, with a crimson cummerbund, and a light square jacket over all;
thus normally set off, his red festive face seemed bursting with
a commonplace cordiality.  He was indeed emphatic, but then he was talking
to his cook--the swarthy son of Malta, whose lean, yellow and rather
careworn face contrasted quaintly with his snow-white cap and costume.
The cook might well be careworn, for cookery was the Major's hobby.
He was one of those amateurs who always know more than the professional.
The only other person he even admitted to be a judge of an omelette
was his friend Cray--and as Brown remembered this, he turned to look
for the other officer.  In the new presence of daylight and people clothed
and in their right mind, the sight of him was rather a shock.
The taller and more elegant man was still in his night-garb,
with tousled black hair, and now crawling about the garden on his hands
and knees, still looking for traces of the burglar; and now and again,
to all appearance, striking the ground with his hand in anger at not
finding him.  Seeing him thus quadrupedal in the grass, the priest
raised his eyebrows rather sadly; and for the first time guessed that
"fancies things" might be an euphemism.

     The third item in the group of the cook and the epicure was also
known to Father Brown; it was Audrey Watson, the Major's ward
and housekeeper; and at this moment, to judge by her apron,
tucked-up sleeves and resolute manner, much more the housekeeper
than the ward.

     "It serves you right," she was saying:  "I always told you
not to have that old-fashioned cruet-stand."

     "I prefer it," said Putnam, placably.  "I'm old-fashioned myself;
and the things keep together."

     "And vanish together, as you see," she retorted.  "Well, if you are
not going to bother about the burglar, I shouldn't bother about the lunch.
It's Sunday, and we can't send for vinegar and all that in the town;
and you Indian gentlemen can't enjoy what you call a dinner without
a lot of hot things.  I wish to goodness now you hadn't asked
Cousin Oliver to take me to the musical service.  It isn't over
till half-past twelve, and the Colonel has to leave by then.
I don't believe you men can manage alone."

     "Oh yes, we can, my dear," said the Major, looking at her
very amiably.  "Marco has all the sauces, and we've often
done ourselves well in very rough places, as you might know by now.
And it's time you had a treat, Audrey; you mustn't be a housekeeper
every hour of the day; and I know you want to hear the music."

     "I want to go to church," she said, with rather severe eyes.

     She was one of those handsome women who will always be handsome,
because the beauty is not in an air or a tint, but in the very structure
of the head and features.  But though she was not yet middle-aged
and her auburn hair was of a Titianesque fullness in form and colour,
there was a look in her mouth and around her eyes which suggested that
some sorrows wasted her, as winds waste at last the edges of a Greek temple.
For indeed the little domestic difficulty of which she was now speaking
so decisively was rather comic than tragic.  Father Brown gathered,
from the course of the conversation, that Cray, the other gourmet,
had to leave before the usual lunch-time; but that Putnam, his host,
not to be done out of a final feast with an old crony, had arranged
for a special dejeuner to be set out and consumed in the course of
the morning, while Audrey and other graver persons were at morning service.
She was going there under the escort of a relative and old friend of hers,
Dr Oliver Oman, who, though a scientific man of a somewhat bitter type,
was enthusiastic for music, and would go even to church to get it.
There was nothing in all this that could conceivably concern
the tragedy in Miss Watson's face; and by a half conscious instinct,
Father Brown turned again to the seeming lunatic grubbing about
in the grass.

     When he strolled across to him, the black, unbrushed head was
lifted abruptly, as if in some surprise at his continued presence.
And indeed, Father Brown, for reasons best known to himself,
had lingered much longer than politeness required; or even,
in the ordinary sense, permitted.

     "Well!" cried Cray, with wild eyes.  "I suppose you think I'm mad,
like the rest?"

     "I have considered the thesis," answered the little man, composedly.
"And I incline to think you are not."

     "What do you mean?" snapped Cray quite savagely.

     "Real madmen," explained Father Brown, "always encourage their
own morbidity.  They never strive against it.  But you are trying
to find traces of the burglar; even when there aren't any.
You are struggling against it.  You want what no madman ever wants."

     "And what is that?"

     "You want to be proved wrong," said Brown.

     During the last words Cray had sprung or staggered to his feet
and was regarding the cleric with agitated eyes.  "By hell,
but that is a true word!" he cried.  "They are all at me here
that the fellow was only after the silver--as if I shouldn't be
only too pleased to think so!  She's been at me," and he tossed his tousled
black head towards Audrey, but the other had no need of the direction,
"she's been at me today about how cruel I was to shoot a poor harmless
house-breaker, and how I have the devil in me against poor harmless natives.
But I was a good-natured man once--as good-natured as Putnam."

     After a pause he said:  "Look here, I've never seen you before;
but you shall judge of the whole story.  Old Putnam and I were friends
in the same mess; but, owing to some accidents on the Afghan border,
I got my command much sooner than most men; only we were both
invalided home for a bit.  I was engaged to Audrey out there;
and we all travelled back together.  But on the journey back
things happened.  Curious things.  The result of them was
that Putnam wants it broken off, and even Audrey keeps it hanging on--
and I know what they mean.  I know what they think I am.  So do you.

     "Well, these are the facts.  The last day we were in
an Indian city I asked Putnam if I could get some Trichinopoli cigars,
he directed me to a little place opposite his lodgings.
I have since found he was quite right; but `opposite' is a dangerous word
when one decent house stands opposite five or six squalid ones;
and I must have mistaken the door.  It opened with difficulty,
and then only on darkness; but as I turned back, the door behind me
sank back and settled into its place with a noise as of innumerable bolts.
There was nothing to do but to walk forward; which I did through
passage after passage, pitch-dark.  Then I came to a flight of steps,
and then to a blind door, secured by a latch of elaborate Eastern ironwork,
which I could only trace by touch, but which I loosened at last.
I came out again upon gloom, which was half turned into
a greenish twilight by a multitude of small but steady lamps below.
They showed merely the feet or fringes of some huge and empty architecture.
Just in front of me was something that looked like a mountain.
I confess I nearly fell on the great stone platform on which I had emerged,
to realize that it was an idol.  And worst of all, an idol with
its back to me.

     "It was hardly half human, I guessed; to judge by the small squat head,
and still more by a thing like a tail or extra limb turned up behind
and pointing, like a loathsome large finger, at some symbol graven
in the centre of the vast stone back.  I had begun, in the dim light,
to guess at the hieroglyphic, not without horror, when a more horrible
thing happened.  A door opened silently in the temple wall
behind me and a man came out, with a brown face and a black coat.
He had a carved smile on his face, of copper flesh and ivory teeth;
but I think the most hateful thing about him was that he was
in European dress.  I was prepared, I think, for shrouded priests
or naked fakirs.  But this seemed to say that the devilry was
over all the earth.  As indeed I found it to be.

     "`If you had only seen the Monkey's Feet,' he said, smiling steadily,
and without other preface, `we should have been very gentle--
you would only be tortured and die.  If you had seen the Monkey's Face,
still we should be very moderate, very tolerant--you would only
be tortured and live.  But as you have seen the Monkey's Tail,
we must pronounce the worst sentence. which is--Go Free.'

     "When he said the words I heard the elaborate iron latch with
which I had struggled, automatically unlock itself:  and then,
far down the dark passages I had passed, I heard the heavy street-door
shifting its own bolts backwards.

     "`It is vain to ask for mercy; you must go free,' said
the smiling man.  `Henceforth a hair shall slay you like a sword,
and a breath shall bite you like an adder; weapons shall come
against you out of nowhere; and you shall die many times.'
And with that he was swallowed once more in the wall behind;
and I went out into the street."

     Cray paused; and Father Brown unaffectedly sat down on the lawn
and began to pick daisies.

     Then the soldier continued:  "Putnam, of course, with his
jolly common sense, pooh-poohed all my fears; and from that time
dates his doubt of my mental balance.  Well, I'll simply tell you,
in the fewest words, the three things that have happened since;
and you shall judge which of us is right.

     "The first happened in an Indian village on the edge of the jungle,
but hundreds of miles from the temple, or town, or type of tribes
and customs where the curse had been put on me.  I woke in black midnight,
and lay thinking of nothing in particular, when I felt a faint
tickling thing, like a thread or a hair, trailed across my throat.
I shrank back out of its way, and could not help thinking of the words
in the temple.  But when I got up and sought lights and a mirror,
the line across my neck was a line of blood.

     "The second happened in a lodging in Port Said, later,
on our journey home together.  It was a jumble of tavern
and curiosity-shop; and though there was nothing there remotely suggesting
the cult of the Monkey, it is, of course, possible that some of its
images or talismans were in such a place.  Its curse was there, anyhow.
I woke again in the dark with a sensation that could not be put
in colder or more literal words than that a breath bit like an adder.
Existence was an agony of extinction; I dashed my head against walls
until I dashed it against a window; and fell rather than jumped
into the garden below.  Putnam, poor fellow, who had called the other thing
a chance scratch, was bound to take seriously the fact of finding me
half insensible on the grass at dawn.  But I fear it was my mental state
he took seriously; and not my story.

     "The third happened in Malta.  We were in a fortress there;
and as it happened our bedrooms overlooked the open sea, which almost
came up to our window-sills, save for a flat white outer wall
as bare as the sea.  I woke up again; but it was not dark.
There was a full moon, as I walked to the window; I could have seen a bird
on the bare battlement, or a sail on the horizon.  What I did see
was a sort of stick or branch circling, self-supported, in the empty sky.
It flew straight in at my window and smashed the lamp beside the pillow
I had just quitted.  It was one of those queer-shaped war-clubs
some Eastern tribes use.  But it had come from no human hand."

     Father Brown threw away a daisy-chain he was making,
and rose with a wistful look.  "Has Major Putnam," he asked,
"got any Eastern curios, idols, weapons and so on, from which
one might get a hint?"

     "Plenty of those, though not much use, I fear," replied Cray;
"but by all means come into his study."

     As they entered they passed Miss Watson buttoning her gloves for church,
and heard the voice of Putnam downstairs still giving a lecture on cookery
to the cook.  In the Major's study and den of curios they came suddenly
on a third party, silk-hatted and dressed for the street, who was
poring over an open book on the smoking-table--a book which he dropped
rather guiltily, and turned.

     Cray introduced him civilly enough, as Dr Oman, but he showed
such disfavour in his very face that Brown guessed the two men,
whether Audrey knew it or not, were rivals.  Nor was the priest
wholly unsympathetic with the prejudice.  Dr Oman was a very well-dressed
gentleman indeed; well-featured, though almost dark enough for an Asiatic.
But Father Brown had to tell himself sharply that one should be in charity
even with those who wax their pointed beards, who have small gloved hands,
and who speak with perfectly modulated voices.

     Cray seemed to find something specially irritating in
the small prayer-book in Oman's dark-gloved hand.  "I didn't know
that was in your line," he said rather rudely.

     Oman laughed mildly, but without offence.  "This is more so, I know,"
he said, laying his hand on the big book he had dropped,
"a dictionary of drugs and such things.  But it's rather too large
to take to church."  Then he closed the larger book, and there seemed
again the faintest touch of hurry and embarrassment.

     "I suppose," said the priest, who seemed anxious to change the subject,
"all these spears and things are from India?"

     "From everywhere," answered the doctor.  "Putnam is an old soldier,
and has been in Mexico and Australia, and the Cannibal Islands
for all I know."

     "I hope it was not in the Cannibal Islands," said Brown,
"that he learnt the art of cookery." And he ran his eyes over
the stew-pots or other strange utensils on the wall.

     At this moment the jolly subject of their conversation
thrust his laughing, lobsterish face into the room.  "Come along, Cray,"
he cried.  "Your lunch is just coming in.  And the bells are ringing
for those who want to go to church."

     Cray slipped upstairs to change; Dr Oman and Miss Watson betook
themselves solemnly down the street, with a string of other churchgoers;
but Father Brown noticed that the doctor twice looked back
and scrutinized the house; and even came back to the corner of the street
to look at it again.

     The priest looked puzzled.  "He can't have been at the dustbin,"
he muttered.  "Not in those clothes.  Or was he there earlier today?"

     Father Brown, touching other people, was as sensitive as a barometer;
but today he seemed about as sensitive as a rhinoceros.  By no social law,
rigid or implied, could he be supposed to linger round the lunch
of the Anglo-Indian friends; but he lingered, covering his position
with torrents of amusing but quite needless conversation.
He was the more puzzling because he did not seem to want any lunch.
As one after another of the most exquisitely balanced kedgerees of curries,
accompanied with their appropriate vintages, were laid before
the other two, he only repeated that it was one of his fast-days,
and munched a piece of bread and sipped and then left untasted
a tumbler of cold water.  His talk, however, was exuberant.

     "I'll tell you what I'll do for you," he cried--, "I'll mix you
a salad!  I can't eat it, but I'll mix it like an angel!
You've got a lettuce there."

     "Unfortunately it's the only thing we have got," answered
the good-humoured Major.  "You must remember that mustard, vinegar,
oil and so on vanished with the cruet and the burglar."

     "I know," replied Brown, rather vaguely.  "That's what I've always
been afraid would happen.  That's why I always carry a cruet-stand
about with me.  I'm so fond of salads."

     And to the amazement of the two men he took a pepper-pot out of
his waistcoat pocket and put it on the table.

     "I wonder why the burglar wanted mustard, too," he went on,
taking a mustard-pot from another pocket.  "A mustard plaster,
I suppose.  And vinegar"--and producing that condiment--
"haven't I heard something about vinegar and brown paper?
As for oil, which I think I put in my left--"

     His garrulity was an instant arrested; for lifting his eyes,
he saw what no one else saw--the black figure of Dr Oman standing
on the sunlit lawn and looking steadily into the room.  Before he could
quite recover himself Cray had cloven in.

     "You're an astounding card," he said, staring.  "I shall come
and hear your sermons, if they're as amusing as your manners."
His voice changed a little, and he leaned back in his chair.

     "Oh, there are sermons in a cruet-stand, too," said Father Brown,
quite gravely.  "Have you heard of faith like a grain of mustard-seed;
or charity that anoints with oil?  And as for vinegar, can any soldiers
forget that solitary soldier, who, when the sun was darkened--"

     Colonel Cray leaned forward a little and clutched the tablecloth.

     Father Brown, who was making the salad, tipped two spoonfuls
of the mustard into the tumbler of water beside him; stood up and said
in a new, loud and sudden voice--"Drink that!"

     At the same moment the motionless doctor in the garden came running,
and bursting open a window cried:  "Am I wanted?  Has he been poisoned?"

     "Pretty near," said Brown, with the shadow of a smile; for
the emetic had very suddenly taken effect.  And Cray lay in a deck-chair,
gasping as for life, but alive.

     Major Putnam had sprung up, his purple face mottled.  "A crime!"
he cried hoarsely.  "I will go for the police!"

     The priest could hear him dragging down his palm-leaf hat from the peg
and tumbling out of the front door; he heard the garden gate slam.
But he only stood looking at Cray; and after a silence said quietly:

     "I shall not talk to you much; but I will tell you what
you want to know.  There is no curse on you.  The Temple of the Monkey
was either a coincidence or a part of the trick; the trick was
the trick of a white man.  There is only one weapon that will bring blood
with that mere feathery touch:  a razor held by a white man.
There is one way of making a common room full of invisible,
overpowering poison:  turning on the gas--the crime of a white man.
And there is only one kind of club that can be thrown out of a window,
turn in mid-air and come back to the window next to it:
the Australian boomerang.  You'll see some of them in the Major's study."

     With that he went outside and spoke for a moment to the doctor.
The moment after, Audrey Watson came rushing into the house and
fell on her knees beside Cray's chair.  He could not hear what they said
to each other; but their faces moved with amazement, not unhappiness.
The doctor and the priest walked slowly towards the garden gate.

     "I suppose the Major was in love with her, too," he said with a sigh;
and when the other nodded, observed:  "You were very generous, doctor.
You did a fine thing.  But what made you suspect?"

     "A very small thing," said Oman; "but it kept me restless in church
till I came back to see that all was well.  That book on his table
was a work on poisons; and was put down open at the place where it stated
that a certain Indian poison, though deadly and difficult to trace,
was particularly easily reversible by the use of the commonest emetics.
I suppose he read that at the last moment--"

     "And remembered that there were emetics in the cruet-stand,"
said Father Brown.  "Exactly.  He threw the cruet in the dustbin--
where I found it, along with other silver--for the sake of
a burglary blind.  But if you look at that pepper-pot I put on the table,
you'll see a small hole.  That's where Cray's bullet struck,
shaking up the pepper and making the criminal sneeze."

     There was a silence.  Then Dr Oman said grimly:  "The Major is
a long time looking for the police."

     "Or the police in looking for the Major?" said the priest.
"Well, good-bye."




XI. The Strange Crime of John Boulnois


MR CALHOUN KIDD was a very young gentleman with a very old face,
a face dried up with its own eagerness, framed in blue-black hair
and a black butterfly tie.  He was the emissary in England
of the colossal American daily called the Western Sun--
also humorously described as the "Rising Sunset".  This was in allusion
to a great journalistic declaration (attributed to Mr Kidd himself)
that "he guessed the sun would rise in the west yet, if American citizens
did a bit more hustling." Those, however, who mock American journalism
from the standpoint of somewhat mellower traditions forget
a certain paradox which partly redeems it.  For while the journalism
of the States permits a pantomimic vulgarity long past anything English,
it also shows a real excitement about the most earnest mental problems,
of which English papers are innocent, or rather incapable.
The Sun was full of the most solemn matters treated in the most
farcical way.  William James figured there as well as "Weary Willie,"
and pragmatists alternated with pugilists in the long procession
of its portraits.

     Thus, when a very unobtrusive Oxford man named John Boulnois
wrote in a very unreadable review called the Natural Philosophy Quarterly
a series of articles on alleged weak points in Darwinian evolution,
it fluttered no corner of the English papers; though Boulnois's theory
(which was that of a comparatively stationary universe visited occasionally
by convulsions of change) had some rather faddy fashionableness at Oxford,
and got so far as to be named "Catastrophism".  But many American papers
seized on the challenge as a great event; and the Sun threw
the shadow of Mr Boulnois quite gigantically across its pages.
By the paradox already noted, articles of valuable intelligence and
enthusiasm were presented with headlines apparently written
by an illiterate maniac, headlines such as "Darwin Chews Dirt;
Critic Boulnois says He Jumps the Shocks"--or "Keep Catastrophic,
says Thinker Boulnois." And Mr Calhoun Kidd, of the Western Sun,
was bidden to take his butterfly tie and lugubrious visage down to
the little house outside Oxford where Thinker Boulnois lived
in happy ignorance of such a title.

     That fated philosopher had consented, in a somewhat dazed manner,
to receive the interviewer, and had named the hour of nine that evening.
The last of a summer sunset clung about Cumnor and the low wooded hills;
the romantic Yankee was both doubtful of his road and inquisitive
about his surroundings; and seeing the door of a genuine feudal
old-country inn, The Champion Arms, standing open, he went in
to make inquiries.

     In the bar parlour he rang the bell, and had to wait
some little time for a reply to it.  The only other person present
was a lean man with close red hair and loose, horsey-looking clothes,
who was drinking very bad whisky, but smoking a very good cigar.
The whisky, of course, was the choice brand of The Champion Arms;
the cigar he had probably brought with him from London.
Nothing could be more different than his cynical negligence from
the dapper dryness of the young American; but something in his pencil
and open notebook, and perhaps in the expression of his alert blue eye,
caused Kidd to guess, correctly, that he was a brother journalist.

     "Could you do me the favour," asked Kidd, with the courtesy of
his nation, "of directing me to the Grey Cottage, where Mr Boulnois lives,
as I understand?"

     "It's a few yards down the road," said the red-haired man,
removing his cigar; "I shall be passing it myself in a minute,
but I'm going on to Pendragon Park to try and see the fun."

     "What is Pendragon Park?" asked Calhoun Kidd.

     "Sir Claude Champion's place--haven't you come down for that, too?"
asked the other pressman, looking up.  "You're a journalist, aren't you?"

     "I have come to see Mr Boulnois," said Kidd.

     "I've come to see Mrs Boulnois," replied the other.
"But I shan't catch her at home." And he laughed rather unpleasantly.

     "Are you interested in Catastrophism?" asked the wondering Yankee.

     "I'm interested in catastrophes; and there are going to be some,"
replied his companion gloomily.  "Mine's a filthy trade,
and I never pretend it isn't."

     With that he spat on the floor; yet somehow in the very act and
instant one could realize that the man had been brought up as a gentleman.

     The American pressman considered him with more attention.
His face was pale and dissipated, with the promise of formidable passions
yet to be loosed; but it was a clever and sensitive face; his clothes
were coarse and careless, but he had a good seal ring on one of his long,
thin fingers.  His name, which came out in the course of talk,
was James Dalroy; he was the son of a bankrupt Irish landlord,
and attached to a pink paper which he heartily despised, called
Smart Society, in the capacity of reporter and of something
painfully like a spy.

     Smart Society, I regret to say, felt none of that interest in
Boulnois on Darwin which was such a credit to the head and hearts of
the Western Sun.  Dalroy had come down, it seemed, to snuff up
the scent of a scandal which might very well end in the Divorce Court,
but which was at present hovering between Grey Cottage and Pendragon Park.

     Sir Claude Champion was known to the readers of the Western Sun
as well as Mr Boulnois.  So were the Pope and the Derby Winner;
but the idea of their intimate acquaintanceship would have struck Kidd
as equally incongruous.  He had heard of (and written about,
nay, falsely pretended to know) Sir Claude Champion, as
"one of the brightest and wealthiest of England's Upper Ten";
as the great sportsman who raced yachts round the world;
as the great traveller who wrote books about the Himalayas,
as the politician who swept constituencies with a startling sort of
Tory Democracy, and as the great dabbler in art, music, literature,
and, above all, acting.  Sir Claude was really rather magnificent in
other than American eyes.  There was something of the Renascence Prince
about his omnivorous culture and restless publicity--, he was not only
a great amateur, but an ardent one.  There was in him none of that
antiquarian frivolity that we convey by the word "dilettante".

     That faultless falcon profile with purple-black Italian eye,
which had been snap-shotted so often both for Smart Society and
the Western Sun, gave everyone the impression of a man eaten by ambition
as by a fire, or even a disease.  But though Kidd knew a great deal
about Sir Claude--a great deal more, in fact, than there was to know--
it would never have crossed his wildest dreams to connect so showy
an aristocrat with the newly-unearthed founder of Catastrophism,
or to guess that Sir Claude Champion and John Boulnois could be
intimate friends.  Such, according to Dalroy's account,
was nevertheless the fact.  The two had hunted in couples at school
and college, and, though their social destinies had been very different
(for Champion was a great landlord and almost a millionaire,
while Boulnois was a poor scholar and, until just lately,
an unknown one), they still kept in very close touch with each other.
Indeed, Boulnois's cottage stood just outside the gates of Pendragon Park.

     But whether the two men could be friends much longer was becoming
a dark and ugly question.  A year or two before, Boulnois had married
a beautiful and not unsuccessful actress, to whom he was devoted
in his own shy and ponderous style; and the proximity of the household
to Champion's had given that flighty celebrity opportunities for behaving
in a way that could not but cause painful and rather base excitement.
Sir Claude had carried the arts of publicity to perfection;
and he seemed to take a crazy pleasure in being equally ostentatious
in an intrigue that could do him no sort of honour.  Footmen from
Pendragon were perpetually leaving bouquets for Mrs Boulnois;
carriages and motor-cars were perpetually calling at the cottage
for Mrs Boulnois; balls and masquerades perpetually filled the grounds
in which the baronet paraded Mrs Boulnois, like the Queen of
Love and Beauty at a tournament.  That very evening, marked by Mr
Kidd for the exposition of Catastrophism, had been marked by
Sir Claude Champion for an open-air rendering of Romeo and Juliet,
in which he was to play Romeo to a Juliet it was needless to name.

     "I don't think it can go on without a smash," said the young man
with red hair, getting up and shaking himself.  "Old Boulnois may be
squared--or he may be square.  But if he's square he's thick--
what you might call cubic.  But I don't believe it's possible."

     "He is a man of grand intellectual powers," said Calhoun Kidd
in a deep voice.

     "Yes," answered Dalroy; "but even a man of grand intellectual powers
can't be such a blighted fool as all that.  Must you be going on?
I shall be following myself in a minute or two."

     But Calhoun Kidd, having finished a milk and soda, betook himself
smartly up the road towards the Grey Cottage, leaving his cynical informant
to his whisky and tobacco.  The last of the daylight had faded;
the skies were of a dark, green-grey, like slate, studded here and there
with a star, but lighter on the left side of the sky, with the promise
of a rising moon.

     The Grey Cottage, which stood entrenched, as it were, in a square
of stiff, high thorn-hedges, was so close under the pines and palisades
of the Park that Kidd at first mistook it for the Park Lodge.
Finding the name on the narrow wooden gate, however, and seeing
by his watch that the hour of the "Thinker's" appointment had just struck,
he went in and knocked at the front door.  Inside the garden hedge,
he could see that the house, though unpretentious enough, was larger
and more luxurious than it looked at first, and was quite a different kind
of place from a porter's lodge.  A dog-kennel and a beehive stood outside,
like symbols of old English country-life; the moon was rising behind
a plantation of prosperous pear trees, the dog that came out of the kennel
was reverend-looking and reluctant to bark; and the plain, elderly
man-servant who opened the door was brief but dignified.

     "Mr Boulnois asked me to offer his apologies, sir," he said,
"but he has been obliged to go out suddenly."

     "But see here, I had an appointment," said the interviewer,
with a rising voice.  "Do you know where he went to?"

     "To Pendragon Park, sir," said the servant, rather sombrely,
and began to close the door.

     Kidd started a little.

     "Did he go with Mrs--with the rest of the party?" he asked
rather vaguely.

     "No, sir," said the man shortly; "he stayed behind, and then
went out alone." And he shut the door, brutally, but with an air of
duty not done.

     The American, that curious compound of impudence and sensitiveness,
was annoyed.  He felt a strong desire to hustle them all along a bit
and teach them business habits; the hoary old dog and the grizzled,
heavy-faced old butler with his prehistoric shirt-front, and the drowsy
old moon, and above all the scatter-brained old philosopher who
couldn't keep an appointment.

     "If that's the way he goes on he deserves to lose his wife's
purest devotion," said Mr Calhoun Kidd.  "But perhaps he's gone over
to make a row.  In that case I reckon a man from the Western Sun
will be on the spot."

     And turning the corner by the open lodge-gates, he set off,
stumping up the long avenue of black pine-woods that pointed
in abrupt perspective towards the inner gardens of Pendragon Park.
The trees were as black and orderly as plumes upon a hearse;
there were still a few stars.  He was a man with more literary
than direct natural associations; the word "Ravenswood" came into
his head repeatedly.  It was partly the raven colour of the pine-woods;
but partly also an indescribable atmosphere almost described
in Scott's great tragedy; the smell of something that died
in the eighteenth century; the smell of dank gardens and broken urns,
of wrongs that will never now be righted; of something that is
none the less incurably sad because it is strangely unreal.

     More than once, as he went up that strange, black road
of tragic artifice, he stopped, startled, thinking he heard steps
in front of him.  He could see nothing in front but the twin sombre
walls of pine and the wedge of starlit sky above them.  At first
he thought he must have fancied it or been mocked by a mere echo of
his own tramp.  But as he went on he was more and more inclined
to conclude, with the remains of his reason, that there really were
other feet upon the road.  He thought hazily of ghosts; and was surprised
how swiftly he could see the image of an appropriate and local ghost,
one with a face as white as Pierrot's, but patched with black.
The apex of the triangle of dark-blue sky was growing brighter and bluer,
but he did not realize as yet that this was because he was coming
nearer to the lights of the great house and garden.  He only felt
that the atmosphere was growing more intense, there was in the sadness
more violence and secrecy--more--he hesitated for the word,
and then said it with a jerk of laughter--Catastrophism.

     More pines, more pathway slid past him, and then he stood rooted
as by a blast of magic.  It is vain to say that he felt as if he had
got into a dream; but this time he felt quite certain that he had
got into a book.  For we human beings are used to inappropriate things;
we are accustomed to the clatter of the incongruous; it is a tune
to which we can go to sleep.  If one appropriate thing happens,
it wakes us up like the pang of a perfect chord.  Something happened
such as would have happened in such a place in a forgotten tale.

     Over the black pine-wood came flying and flashing in the moon
a naked sword--such a slender and sparkling rapier as may have
fought many an unjust duel in that ancient park.  It fell on the pathway
far in front of him and lay there glistening like a large needle.
He ran like a hare and bent to look at it.  Seen at close quarters
it had rather a showy look:  the big red jewels in the hilt and guard
were a little dubious.  But there were other red drops upon the blade
which were not dubious.

     He looked round wildly in the direction from which the dazzling missile
had come, and saw that at this point the sable facade of fir and pine
was interrupted by a smaller road at right angles; which, when he turned it,
brought him in full view of the long, lighted house, with a lake and
fountains in front of it.  Nevertheless, he did not look at this,
having something more interesting to look at.

     Above him, at the angle of the steep green bank of the
terraced garden, was one of those small picturesque surprises
common in the old landscape gardening; a kind of small round hill or
dome of grass, like a giant mole-hill, ringed and crowned with
three concentric fences of roses, and having a sundial in the highest point
in the centre.  Kidd could see the finger of the dial stand up dark
against the sky like the dorsal fin of a shark and the vain moonlight
clinging to that idle clock.  But he saw something else clinging
to it also, for one wild moment--the figure of a man.

     Though he saw it there only for a moment, though it was outlandish
and incredible in costume, being clad from neck to heel in tight crimson,
with glints of gold, yet he knew in one flash of moonlight who it was.
That white face flung up to heaven, clean-shaven and so unnaturally young,
like Byron with a Roman nose, those black curls already grizzled--
he had seen the thousand public portraits of Sir Claude Champion.
The wild red figure reeled an instant against the sundial; the next
it had rolled down the steep bank and lay at the American's feet,
faintly moving one arm.  A gaudy, unnatural gold ornament on the arm
suddenly reminded Kidd of Romeo and Juliet; of course the tight crimson
suit was part of the play.  But there was a long red stain down
the bank from which the man had rolled--that was no part of the play.
He had been run through the body.

     Mr Calhoun Kidd shouted and shouted again.  Once more he seemed
to hear phantasmal footsteps, and started to find another figure
already near him.  He knew the figure, and yet it terrified him.
The dissipated youth who had called himself Dalroy had a horribly quiet
way with him; if Boulnois failed to keep appointments that had been made,
Dalroy had a sinister air of keeping appointments that hadn't.
The moonlight discoloured everything, against Dalroy's red hair
his wan face looked not so much white as pale green.

     All this morbid impressionism must be Kidd's excuse for having
cried out, brutally and beyond all reason:  "Did you do this, you devil?"

     James Dalroy smiled his unpleasing smile; but before he could speak,
the fallen figure made another movement of the arm, waving vaguely
towards the place where the sword fell; then came a moan, and then
it managed to speak.

     "Boulnois....  Boulnois, I say....  Boulnois did it...
jealous of me...he was jealous, he was, he was..."

     Kidd bent his head down to hear more, and just managed
to catch the words:

     "Boulnois...with my own sword...he threw it..."

     Again the failing hand waved towards the sword, and then fell rigid
with a thud.  In Kidd rose from its depth all that acrid humour
that is the strange salt of the seriousness of his race.

     "See here," he said sharply and with command, "you must
fetch a doctor.  This man's dead."

     "And a priest, too, I suppose," said Dalroy in an undecipherable manner.
"All these Champions are papists."

     The American knelt down by the body, felt the heart, propped up
the head and used some last efforts at restoration; but before
the other journalist reappeared, followed by a doctor and a priest,
he was already prepared to assert they were too late.

     "Were you too late also?" asked the doctor, a solid
prosperous-looking man, with conventional moustache and whiskers,
but a lively eye, which darted over Kidd dubiously.

     "In one sense," drawled the representative of the Sun.
"I was too late to save the man, but I guess I was in time to hear
something of importance.  I heard the dead man denounce his assassin."

     "And who was the assassin?" asked the doctor, drawing his
eyebrows together.

     "Boulnois," said Calhoun Kidd, and whistled softly.

     The doctor stared at him gloomily with a reddening brow--,
but he did not contradict.  Then the priest, a shorter figure
in the background, said mildly:  "I understood that Mr Boulnois
was not coming to Pendragon Park this evening."

     "There again," said the Yankee grimly, "I may be in a position
to give the old country a fact or two.  Yes, sir, John Boulnois
was going to stay in all this evening; he fixed up a real good appointment
there with me.  But John Boulnois changed his mind; John Boulnois
left his home abruptly and all alone, and came over to this darned Park
an hour or so ago.  His butler told me so.  I think we hold what
the all-wise police call a clue--have you sent for them?"

     "Yes," said the doctor, "but we haven't alarmed anyone else yet."

     "Does Mrs Boulnois know?" asked James Dalroy, and again Kidd
was conscious of an irrational desire to hit him on his curling mouth.

     "I have not told her," said the doctor gruffly--, "but here come
the police."

     The little priest had stepped out into the main avenue,
and now returned with the fallen sword, which looked ludicrously large
and theatrical when attached to his dumpy figure, at once clerical
and commonplace.  "Just before the police come," he said apologetically,
"has anyone got a light?"

     The Yankee journalist took an electric torch from his pocket,
and the priest held it close to the middle part of the blade,
which he examined with blinking care.  Then, without glancing at
the point or pommel, he handed the long weapon to the doctor.

     "I fear I'm no use here," he said, with a brief sigh.
"I'll say good night to you, gentlemen." And he walked away
up the dark avenue towards the house, his hands clasped behind him
and his big head bent in cogitation.

     The rest of the group made increased haste towards the lodge-gates,
where an inspector and two constables could already be seen
in consultation with the lodge-keeper.  But the little priest
only walked slower and slower in the dim cloister of pine, and at last
stopped dead, on the steps of the house.  It was his silent way
of acknowledging an equally silent approach; for there came towards
him a presence that might have satisfied even Calhoun Kidd's demands
for a lovely and aristocratic ghost.  It was a young woman
in silvery satins of a Renascence design; she had golden hair
in two long shining ropes, and a face so startingly pale between them
that she might have been chryselephantine--made, that is, like some
old Greek statues, out of ivory and gold.  But her eyes were very bright,
and her voice, though low, was confident.

     "Father Brown?" she said.

     "Mrs Boulnois?" he replied gravely.  Then he looked at her and
immediately said:  "I see you know about Sir Claude."

     "How do you know I know?" she asked steadily.

     He did not answer the question, but asked another:  "Have you
seen your husband?"

     "My husband is at home," she said.  "He has nothing to do with this."

     Again he did not answer; and the woman drew nearer to him,
with a curiously intense expression on her face.

     "Shall I tell you something more?" she said, with a rather
fearful smile.  "I don't think he did it, and you don't either."
Father Brown returned her gaze with a long, grave stare, and then nodded,
yet more gravely.

     "Father Brown," said the lady, "I am going to tell you all I know,
but I want you to do me a favour first.  Will you tell me why
you haven't jumped to the conclusion of poor John's guilt,
as all the rest have done?   Don't mind what you say:  I--I know about
the gossip and the appearances that are against me."

     Father Brown looked honestly embarrassed, and passed his hand
across his forehead.  "Two very little things," he said.
"At least, one's very trivial and the other very vague.
But such as they are, they don't fit in with Mr Boulnois
being the murderer."

     He turned his blank, round face up to the stars and
continued absentmindedly:  "To take the vague idea first.
I attach a good deal of importance to vague ideas.  All those things that
`aren't evidence' are what convince me.  I think a moral impossibility
the biggest of all impossibilities.  I know your husband only slightly,
but I think this crime of his, as generally conceived, something
very like a moral impossibility.  Please do not think I mean that
Boulnois could not be so wicked.  Anybody can be wicked--as wicked as
he chooses.  We can direct our moral wills; but we can't generally change
our instinctive tastes and ways of doing things.  Boulnois might
commit a murder, but not this murder.  He would not snatch Romeo's sword
from its romantic scabbard; or slay his foe on the sundial as on
a kind of altar; or leave his body among the roses, or fling the sword
away among the pines.  If Boulnois killed anyone he'd do it
quietly and heavily, as he'd do any other doubtful thing--
take a tenth glass of port, or read a loose Greek poet.
No, the romantic setting is not like Boulnois.  It's more like Champion."

     "Ah!" she said, and looked at him with eyes like diamonds.

     "And the trivial thing was this," said Brown.  "There were
finger-prints on that sword; finger-prints can be detected quite
a time after they are made if they're on some polished surface
like glass or steel.  These were on a polished surface.
They were half-way down the blade of the sword.  Whose prints they were
I have no earthly clue; but why should anybody hold a sword half-way down?
It was a long sword, but length is an advantage in lunging at an enemy.
At least, at most enemies.  At all enemies except one."

     "Except one," she repeated.

     "There is only one enemy," said Father Brown, "whom it is easier
to kill with a dagger than a sword."

     "I know," said the woman.  "Oneself."

     There was a long silence, and then the priest said quietly
but abruptly:  "Am I right, then?  Did Sir Claude kill himself?"

     "Yes" she said, with a face like marble.  "I saw him do it."

     "He died," said Father Brown, "for love of you?"

     An extraordinary expression flashed across her face,
very different from pity, modesty, remorse, or anything her companion
had expected:  her voice became suddenly strong and full.
"I don't believe," she said, "he ever cared about me a rap.
He hated my husband."

     "Why?" asked the other, and turned his round face from the sky
to the lady.

     "He hated my husband because...it is so strange I hardly know
how to say it...because..."

     "Yes?" said Brown patiently.

     "Because my husband wouldn't hate him."

     Father Brown only nodded, and seemed still to be listening;
he differed from most detectives in fact and fiction in a small point--
he never pretended not to understand when he understood perfectly well.

     Mrs Boulnois drew near once more with the same contained
glow of certainty.  "My husband," she said, "is a great man.
Sir Claude Champion was not a great man:  he was a celebrated and
successful man.  My husband has never been celebrated or successful;
and it is the solemn truth that he has never dreamed of being so.
He no more expects to be famous for thinking than for smoking cigars.
On all that side he has a sort of splendid stupidity.  He has never
grown up.  He still liked Champion exactly as he liked him at school;
he admired him as he would admire a conjuring trick done at
the dinner-table. But he couldn't be got to conceive the notion of
envying Champion.  And Champion wanted to be envied.  He went mad
and killed himself for that."

     "Yes," said Father Brown; "I think I begin to understand."

     "Oh, don't you see?" she cried; "the whole picture is made for that--
the place is planned for it.  Champion put John in a little house
at his very door, like a dependant--to make him feel a failure.
He never felt it.  He thinks no more about such things than--
than an absent-minded lion.  Champion would burst in on John's
shabbiest hours or homeliest meals with some dazzling present or
announcement or expedition that made it like the visit of Haroun Alraschid,
and John would accept or refuse amiably with one eye off, so to speak,
like one lazy schoolboy agreeing or disagreeing with another.
After five years of it John had not turned a hair; and Sir Claude Champion
was a monomaniac."

     "And Haman began to tell them," said Father Brown,
"of all the things wherein the king had honoured him; and he said:
`All these things profit me nothing while I see Mordecai the Jew
sitting in the gate.'"

     "The crisis came," Mrs Boulnois continued, "when I persuaded John
to let me take down some of his speculations and send them to a magazine.
They began to attract attention, especially in America, and one paper
wanted to interview him. When Champion (who was interviewed
nearly every day) heard of this late little crumb of success
falling to his unconscious rival, the last link snapped that held back
his devilish hatred. Then he began to lay that insane siege to my own
love and honour which has been the talk of the shire.  You will ask me
why I allowed such atrocious attentions.  I answer that I could not have
declined them except by explaining to my husband, and there are
some things the soul cannot do, as the body cannot fly.
Nobody could have explained to my husband.  Nobody could do it now.
If you said to him in so many words, `Champion is stealing your wife,'
he would think the joke a little vulgar:  that it could be anything
but a joke--that notion could find no crack in his great skull
to get in by.  Well, John was to come and see us act this evening,
but just as we were starting he said he wouldn't; he had got
an interesting book and a cigar.  I told this to Sir Claude,
and it was his death-blow.  The monomaniac suddenly saw despair.
He stabbed himself, crying out like a devil that Boulnois was slaying him;
he lies there in the garden dead of his own jealousy to produce jealousy,
and John is sitting in the dining-room reading a book."

     There was another silence, and then the little priest said:
"There is only one weak point, Mrs Boulnois, in all your
very vivid account.  Your husband is not sitting in the dining-room
reading a book.  That American reporter told me he had been to your house,
and your butler told him Mr Boulnois had gone to Pendragon Park after all."

     Her bright eyes widened to an almost electric glare;
and yet it seemed rather bewilderment than confusion or fear.
"Why, what can you mean?" she cried.  "All the servants were
out of the house, seeing the theatricals.  And we don't keep a butler,
thank goodness!"

     Father Brown started and spun half round like an absurd teetotum.
"What, what?" he cried seeming galvanized into sudden life.
"Look here--I say--can I make your husband hear if I go to the house?"

     "Oh, the servants will be back by now," she said, wondering.

     "Right, right!" rejoined the cleric energetically, and set off
scuttling up the path towards the Park gates.  He turned once to say:
"Better get hold of that Yankee, or `Crime of John Boulnois' will be
all over the Republic in large letters."

     "You don't understand," said Mrs Boulnois.  "He wouldn't mind.
I don't think he imagines that America really is a place."

     When Father Brown reached the house with the beehive and
the drowsy dog, a small and neat maid-servant showed him into
the dining-room, where Boulnois sat reading by a shaded lamp,
exactly as his wife described him.  A decanter of port and a wineglass
were at his elbow; and the instant the priest entered he noted
the long ash stand out unbroken on his cigar.

     "He has been here for half an hour at least," thought Father Brown.
In fact, he had the air of sitting where he had sat when his dinner
was cleared away.

     "Don't get up, Mr Boulnois," said the priest in his pleasant,
prosaic way.  "I shan't interrupt you a moment.  I fear I break in on
some of your scientific studies."

     "No," said Boulnois; "I was reading `The Bloody Thumb.'"
He said it with neither frown nor smile, and his visitor was conscious
of a certain deep and virile indifference in the man which his wife
had called greatness.  He laid down a gory yellow "shocker"
without even feeling its incongruity enough to comment on it humorously.
John Boulnois was a big, slow-moving man with a massive head,
partly grey and partly bald, and blunt, burly features.
He was in shabby and very old-fashioned evening-dress, with a narrow
triangular opening of shirt-front:  he had assumed it that evening
in his original purpose of going to see his wife act Juliet.

     "I won't keep you long from `The Bloody Thumb' or any other
catastrophic affairs," said Father Brown, smiling.  "I only came
to ask you about the crime you committed this evening."

     Boulnois looked at him steadily, but a red bar began to show
across his broad brow; and he seemed like one discovering embarrassment
for the first time.

     "I know it was a strange crime," assented Brown in a low voice.
"Stranger than murder perhaps--to you.  The little sins are sometimes
harder to confess than the big ones--but that's why it's so important
to confess them.  Your crime is committed by every fashionable hostess
six times a week:  and yet you find it sticks to your tongue like
a nameless atrocity."

     "It makes one feel," said the philosopher slowly, "such a
damned fool."

     "I know," assented the other, "but one often has to choose
between feeling a damned fool and being one."

     "I can't analyse myself well," went on Boulnois; "but sitting
in that chair with that story I was as happy as a schoolboy
on a half-holiday.  It was security, eternity--I can't convey it...
the cigars were within reach...the matches were within reach...
the Thumb had four more appearances to...it was not only a peace,
but a plenitude.  Then that bell rang, and I thought for one long,
mortal minute that I couldn't get out of that chair--literally,
physically, muscularly couldn't.  Then I did it like a man
lifting the world, because I knew all the servants were out.
I opened the front door, and there was a little man with his mouth open
to speak and his notebook open to write in.  I remembered the Yankee
interviewer I had forgotten.  His hair was parted in the middle,
and I tell you that murder--"

     "I understand," said Father Brown.  "I've seen him."

     "I didn't commit murder," continued the Catastrophist mildly,
"but only perjury.  I said I had gone across to Pendragon Park
and shut the door in his face.  That is my crime, Father Brown,
and I don't know what penance you would inflict for it."

     "I shan't inflict any penance," said the clerical gentleman,
collecting his heavy hat and umbrella with an air of some amusement;
"quite the contrary.  I came here specially to let you off the little
penance which would otherwise have followed your little offence."

     "And what," asked Boulnois, smiling, "is the little penance
I have so luckily been let off?"

     "Being hanged," said Father Brown.



XII. The Fairy Tale of Father Brown


THE picturesque city and state of Heiligwaldenstein was one of those
toy kingdoms of which certain parts of the German Empire still consist.
It had come under the Prussian hegemony quite late in history--
hardly fifty years before the fine summer day when Flambeau and
Father Brown found themselves sitting in its gardens and drinking its beer.
There had been not a little of war and wild justice there within
living memory, as soon will be shown.  But in merely looking at it
one could not dismiss that impression of childishness which is
the most charming side of Germany--those little pantomime,
paternal monarchies in which a king seems as domestic as a cook.
The German soldiers by the innumerable sentry-boxes looked strangely like
German toys, and the clean-cut battlements of the castle,
gilded by the sunshine, looked the more like the gilt gingerbread.
For it was brilliant weather.  The sky was as Prussian a blue as
Potsdam itself could require, but it was yet more like that lavish and
glowing use of the colour which a child extracts from a shilling paint-box.
Even the grey-ribbed trees looked young, for the pointed buds on them
were still pink, and in a pattern against the strong blue looked like
innumerable childish figures.

     Despite his prosaic appearance and generally practical walk of life,
Father Brown was not without a certain streak of romance in his composition,
though he generally kept his daydreams to himself, as many children do.
Amid the brisk, bright colours of such a day, and in the heraldic
framework of such a town, he did feel rather as if he had entered
a fairy tale.  He took a childish pleasure, as a younger brother might,
in the formidable sword-stick which Flambeau always flung as he walked,
and which now stood upright beside his tall mug of Munich.
Nay, in his sleepy irresponsibility, he even found himself eyeing the
knobbed and clumsy head of his own shabby umbrella, with some
faint memories of the ogre's club in a coloured toy-book.
But he never composed anything in the form of fiction, unless it be
the tale that follows:

     "I wonder," he said, "whether one would have real adventures
in a place like this, if one put oneself in the way?  It's a splendid
back-scene for them, but I always have a kind of feeling that they
would fight you with pasteboard sabres more than real, horrible swords."

     "You are mistaken," said his friend.  "In this place they
not only fight with swords, but kill without swords.  And there's
worse than that."

     "Why, what do you mean?" asked Father Brown.

     "Why," replied the other, "I should say this was the only place
in Europe where a man was ever shot without firearms."

     "Do you mean a bow and arrow?" asked Brown in some wonder.

     "I mean a bullet in the brain," replied Flambeau.
"Don't you know the story of the late Prince of this place?
It was one of the great police mysteries about twenty years ago.
You remember, of course, that this place was forcibly annexed
at the time of Bismarck's very earliest schemes of consolidation--
forcibly, that is, but not at all easily.  The empire (or what wanted
to be one) sent Prince Otto of Grossenmark to rule the place
in the Imperial interests.  We saw his portrait in the gallery there--
a handsome old gentleman if he'd had any hair or eyebrows,
and hadn't been wrinkled all over like a vulture; but he had
things to harass him, as I'll explain in a minute.  He was a soldier
of distinguished skill and success, but he didn't have altogether
an easy job with this little place.  He was defeated in several battles
by the celebrated Arnhold brothers--the three guerrilla patriots
to whom Swinburne wrote a poem, you remember:

        Wolves with the hair of the ermine,
          Crows that are crowned and kings--
        These things be many as vermin,
          Yet Three shall abide these things.

Or something of that kind.  Indeed, it is by no means certain
that the occupation would ever have been successful had not one of
the three brothers, Paul, despicably, but very decisively declined
to abide these things any longer, and, by surrendering all the secrets
of the insurrection, ensured its overthrow and his own ultimate promotion
to the post of chamberlain to Prince Otto.  After this, Ludwig,
the one genuine hero among Mr Swinburne's heroes, was killed,
sword in hand, in the capture of the city; and the third, Heinrich,
who, though not a traitor, had always been tame and even timid
compared with his active brothers, retired into something like a hermitage,
became converted to a Christian quietism which was almost Quakerish,
and never mixed with men except to give nearly all he had to the poor.
They tell me that not long ago he could still be seen about
the neighbourhood occasionally, a man in a black cloak, nearly blind,
with very wild, white hair, but a face of astonishing softness."

     "I know," said Father Brown.  "I saw him once."

     His friend looked at him in some surprise.  "I didn't know
you'd been here before," he said.  "Perhaps you know as much about it
as I do.  Anyhow, that's the story of the Arnholds, and he was
the last survivor of them.  Yes, and of all the men who played parts
in that drama."

     "You mean that the Prince, too, died long before?"

     "Died," repeated Flambeau, "and that's about as much as we can say.
You must understand that towards the end of his life he began
to have those tricks of the nerves not uncommon with tyrants.
He multiplied the ordinary daily and nightly guard round his castle
till there seemed to be more sentry-boxes than houses in the town,
and doubtful characters were shot without mercy.  He lived almost entirely
in a little room that was in the very centre of the enormous labyrinth
of all the other rooms, and even in this he erected another sort of
central cabin or cupboard, lined with steel, like a safe or a battleship.
Some say that under the floor of this again was a secret hole in the earth,
no more than large enough to hold him, so that, in his anxiety
to avoid the grave, he was willing to go into a place pretty much like it.
But he went further yet.  The populace had been supposed to be disarmed
ever since the suppression of the revolt, but Otto now insisted,
as governments very seldom insist, on an absolute and literal disarmament.
It was carried out, with extraordinary thoroughness and severity,
by very well-organized officials over a small and familiar area, and,
so far as human strength and science can be absolutely certain of anything,
Prince Otto was absolutely certain that nobody could introduce so much as
a toy pistol into Heiligwaldenstein."

     "Human science can never be quite certain of things like that,"
said Father Brown, still looking at the red budding of the branches
over his head, "if only because of the difficulty about definition
and connotation.  What is a weapon?  People have been murdered
with the mildest domestic comforts; certainly with tea-kettles,
probably with tea-cosies.  On the other hand, if you showed
an Ancient Briton a revolver, I doubt if he would know it was a weapon--
until it was fired into him, of course.  Perhaps somebody introduced
a firearm so new that it didn't even look like a firearm.
Perhaps it looked like a thimble or something.  Was the bullet
at all peculiar?"

     "Not that I ever heard of," answered Flambeau; "but my information
is fragmentary, and only comes from my old friend Grimm.
He was a very able detective in the German service, and he tried
to arrest me; I arrested him instead, and we had many interesting chats.
He was in charge here of the inquiry about Prince Otto, but I forgot
to ask him anything about the bullet.  According to Grimm,
what happened was this."  He paused a moment to drain the greater part
of his dark lager at a draught, and then resumed:

     "On the evening in question, it seems, the Prince was expected
to appear in one of the outer rooms, because he had to receive
certain visitors whom he really wished to meet.  They were geological
experts sent to investigate the old question of the alleged supply of gold
from the rocks round here, upon which (as it was said) the small city-state
had so long maintained its credit and been able to negotiate with
its neighbours even under the ceaseless bombardment of bigger armies.
Hitherto it had never been found by the most exacting inquiry
which could--"

     "Which could be quite certain of discovering a toy pistol,"
said Father Brown with a smile.  "But what about the brother who ratted?
Hadn't he anything to tell the Prince?"

     "He always asseverated that he did not know," replied Flambeau;
"that this was the one secret his brothers had not told him.
It is only right to say that it received some support from
fragmentary words--spoken by the great Ludwig in the hour of death,
when he looked at Heinrich but pointed at Paul, and said,
`You have not told him...' and was soon afterwards incapable of speech.
Anyhow, the deputation of distinguished geologists and mineralogists
from Paris and Berlin were there in the most magnificent and
appropriate dress, for there are no men who like wearing their decorations
so much as the men of science--as anybody knows who has ever been to
a soiree of the Royal Society.  It was a brilliant gathering,
but very late, and gradually the Chamberlain--you saw his portrait, too:
a man with black eyebrows, serious eyes, and a meaningless sort of
smile underneath--the Chamberlain, I say, discovered there was
everything there except the Prince himself.  He searched all the
outer salons; then, remembering the man's mad fits of fear,
hurried to the inmost chamber.  That also was empty, but the steel turret
or cabin erected in the middle of it took some time to open.
When it did open it was empty, too.  He went and looked into
the hole in the ground, which seemed deeper and somehow all the more
like a grave--that is his account, of course.  And even as he did so
he heard a burst of cries and tumult in the long rooms
and corridors without.

     "First it was a distant din and thrill of something unthinkable
on the horizon of the crowd, even beyond the castle.  Next it was
a wordless clamour startlingly close, and loud enough to be distinct
if each word had not killed the other.  Next came words
of a terrible clearness, coming nearer, and next one man,
rushing into the room and telling the news as briefly as such news is told.

     "Otto, Prince of Heiligwaldenstein and Grossenmark, was lying
in the dews of the darkening twilight in the woods beyond the castle,
with his arms flung out and his face flung up to the moon.
The blood still pulsed from his shattered temple and jaw,
but it was the only part of him that moved like a living thing.
He was clad in his full white and yellow uniform, as to receive his
guests within, except that the sash or scarf had been unbound and lay
rather crumpled by his side.  Before he could be lifted he was dead.
But, dead or alive, he was a riddle--he who had always hidden in
the inmost chamber out there in the wet woods, unarmed and alone."

     "Who found his body?" asked Father Brown.

     "Some girl attached to the Court named Hedwig von something or other,"
replied his friend, "who had been out in the wood picking wild flowers."

     "Had she picked any?" asked the priest, staring rather vacantly
at the veil of the branches above him.

     "Yes," replied Flambeau.  "I particularly remember that
the Chamberlain, or old Grimm or somebody, said how horrible it was,
when they came up at her call, to see a girl holding spring flowers
and bending over that--that bloody collapse.  However, the main point is
that before help arrived he was dead, and the news, of course,
had to be carried back to the castle.  The consternation it created was
something beyond even that natural in a Court at the fall of a potentate.
The foreign visitors, especially the mining experts, were in the wildest
doubt and excitement, as well as many important Prussian officials,
and it soon began to be clear that the scheme for finding the treasure
bulked much bigger in the business than people had supposed.
Experts and officials had been promised great prizes or
international advantages, and some even said that the Prince's
secret apartments and strong military protection were due less to fear
of the populace than to the pursuit of some private investigation of--"

     "Had the flowers got long stalks?" asked Father Brown.

     Flambeau stared at him.  "What an odd person you are!" he said.
"That's exactly what old Grimm said.  He said the ugliest part of it,
he thought--uglier than the blood and bullet--was that the flowers
were quite short, plucked close under the head."

     "Of course," said the priest, "when a grown up girl is really
picking flowers, she picks them with plenty of stalk.  If she just
pulled their heads off, as a child does, it looks as if--"
And he hesitated.

     "Well?" inquired the other.

     "Well, it looks rather as if she had snatched them nervously,
to make an excuse for being there after--well, after she was there."

     "I know what you're driving at," said Flambeau rather gloomily.
"But that and every other suspicion breaks down on the one point--
the want of a weapon.  He could have been killed, as you say,
with lots of other things--even with his own military sash;
but we have to explain not bow he was killed, but how he was shot.
And the fact is we can't.  They had the girl most ruthlessly searched;
for, to tell the truth, she was a little suspect, though the niece
and ward of the wicked old Chamberlain, Paul Arnhold.  But she was
very romantic, and was suspected of sympathy with the old revolutionary
enthusiasm in her family.  All the same, however romantic you are,
you can't imagine a big bullet into a man's jaw or brain without using
a gun or pistol.  And there was no pistol, though there were
two pistol shots.  I leave it to you, my friend."

     "How do you know there were two shots?" asked the little priest.

     "There was only one in his head," said his companion,
"but there was another bullet-hole in the sash."

     Father Brown's smooth brow became suddenly constricted.
"Was the other bullet found?" he demanded.

     Flambeau started a little.  "I don't think I remember," he said.

     "Hold on!  Hold on!  Hold on!" cried Brown, frowning more and more,
with a quite unusual concentration of curiosity.  "Don't think me rude.
Let me think this out for a moment."

     "All right," said Flambeau, laughing, and finished his beer.
A slight breeze stirred the budding trees and blew up into the sky
cloudlets of white and pink that seemed to make the sky bluer and
the whole coloured scene more quaint.  They might have been cherubs
flying home to the casements of a sort of celestial nursery.
The oldest tower of the castle, the Dragon Tower, stood up as grotesque
as the ale-mug, but as homely.  Only beyond the tower glimmered
the wood in which the man had lain dead.

     "What became of this Hedwig eventually?" asked the priest at last.

     "She is married to General Schwartz," said Flambeau.
"No doubt you've heard of his career, which was rather romantic.
He had distinguished himself even, before his exploits at Sadowa
and Gravelotte; in fact, he rose from the ranks, which is very unusual
even in the smallest of the German..."

     Father Brown sat up suddenly.

     "Rose from the ranks!" he cried, and made a mouth as if to whistle.
"Well, well, what a queer story!  What a queer way of killing a man;
but I suppose it was the only one possible.  But to think of hate
so patient--"

     "What do you mean?" demanded the other.  "In what way did they
kill the man?"

     "They killed him with the sash," said Brown carefully; and then,
as Flambeau protested:  "Yes, yes, I know about the bullet.
Perhaps I ought to say he died of having a sash.  I know it doesn't sound
like having a disease."

     "I suppose," said Flambeau, "that you've got some notion
in your head, but it won't easily get the bullet out of his.
As I explained before, he might easily have been strangled.
But he was shot.  By whom?  By what?"

     "He was shot by his own orders," said the priest.

     "You mean he committed suicide?"

     "I didn't say by his own wish," replied Father Brown.
"I said by his own orders."

     "Well, anyhow, what is your theory?"

     Father Brown laughed.  "I am only on my holiday," he said.
"I haven't got any theories.  Only this place reminds me of fairy stories,
and, if you like, I'll tell you a story."

     The little pink clouds, that looked rather like sweet-stuff,
had floated up to crown the turrets of the gilt gingerbread castle,
and the pink baby fingers of the budding trees seemed spreading and
stretching to reach them; the blue sky began to take a bright violet
of evening, when Father Brown suddenly spoke again:

     "It was on a dismal night, with rain still dropping from the trees
and dew already clustering, that Prince Otto of Grossenmark stepped
hurriedly out of a side door of the castle and walked swiftly
into the wood.  One of the innumerable sentries saluted him,
but he did not notice it.  He had no wish to be specially noticed himself.
He was glad when the great trees, grey and already greasy with rain,
swallowed him up like a swamp.  He had deliberately chosen
the least frequented side of his palace, but even that was more frequented
than he liked.  But there was no particular chance of officious
or diplomatic pursuit, for his exit had been a sudden impulse.
All the full-dressed diplomatists he left behind were unimportant.
He had realized suddenly that he could do without them.

     "His great passion was not the much nobler dread of death,
but the strange desire of gold.  For this legend of the gold he had
left Grossenmark and invaded Heiligwaldenstein.  For this and only this
he had bought the traitor and butchered the hero, for this he had
long questioned and cross-questioned the false Chamberlain,
until he had come to the conclusion that, touching his ignorance,
the renegade really told the truth.  For this he had, somewhat reluctantly,
paid and promised money on the chance of gaining the larger amount;
and for this he had stolen out of his palace like a thief in the rain,
for he had thought of another way to get the desire of his eyes,
and to get it cheap.

     "Away at the upper end of a rambling mountain path to which
he was making his way, among the pillared rocks along the ridge
that hangs above the town, stood the hermitage, hardly more than
a cavern fenced with thorn, in which the third of the great brethren
had long hidden himself from the world.  He, thought Prince Otto,
could have no real reason for refusing to give up the gold.
He had known its place for years, and made no effort to find it,
even before his new ascetic creed had cut him off from property
or pleasures.  True, he had been an enemy, but he now professed
a duty of having no enemies.  Some concession to his cause,
some appeal to his principles, would probably get the mere money secret
out of him.  Otto was no coward, in spite of his network of military
precautions, and, in any case, his avarice was stronger than his fears.
Nor was there much cause for fear.  Since he was certain there were
no private arms in the whole principality, he was a hundred times
more certain there were none in the Quaker's little hermitage on the hill,
where he lived on herbs, with two old rustic servants, and with
no other voice of man for year after year.  Prince Otto looked down
with something of a grim smile at the bright, square labyrinths
of the lamp-lit city below him.  For as far as the eye could see
there ran the rifles of his friends, and not one pinch of powder
for his enemies.  Rifles ranked so close even to that mountain path
that a cry from him would bring the soldiers rushing up the hill,
to say nothing of the fact that the wood and ridge were patrolled
at regular intervals; rifles so far away, in the dim woods,
dwarfed by distance, beyond the river, that an enemy could not
slink into the town by any detour.  And round the palace rifles
at the west door and the east door, at the north door and the south,
and all along the four facades linking them.  He was safe.

     "It was all the more clear when he had crested the ridge
and found how naked was the nest of his old enemy.  He found himself
on a small platform of rock, broken abruptly by the three corners
of precipice.  Behind was the black cave, masked with green thorn,
so low that it was hard to believe that a man could enter it.
In front was the fall of the cliffs and the vast but cloudy
vision of the valley.  On the small rock platform stood
an old bronze lectern or reading-stand, groaning under a great German Bible.
The bronze or copper of it had grown green with the eating airs
of that exalted place, and Otto had instantly the thought,
"Even if they had arms, they must be rusted by now." Moonrise had already
made a deathly dawn behind the crests and crags, and the rain had ceased.

     "Behind the lectern, and looking across the valley,
stood a very old man in a black robe that fell as straight as
the cliffs around him, but whose white hair and weak voice seemed alike
to waver in the wind.  He was evidently reading some daily lesson
as part of his religious exercises.  "They trust in their horses..."

     "`Sir,' said the Prince of Heiligwaldenstein, with quite unusual
courtesy, `I should like only one word with you.'

     "`...and in their chariots,' went on the old man weakly,
`but we will trust in the name of the Lord of Hosts....'
His last words were inaudible, but he closed the book reverently and,
being nearly blind, made a groping movement and gripped the reading-stand.
Instantly his two servants slipped out of the low-browed cavern
and supported him.  They wore dull-black gowns like his own,
but they had not the frosty silver on the hair, nor the frost-bitten
refinement of the features.  They were peasants, Croat or Magyar,
with broad, blunt visages and blinking eyes.  For the first time
something troubled the Prince, but his courage and diplomatic sense
stood firm.

     "`I fear we have not met,' he said, `since that awful cannonade
in which your poor brother died.'

     "`All my brothers died,' said the old man, still looking
across the valley.  Then, for one instant turning on Otto his drooping,
delicate features, and the wintry hair that seemed to drip
over his eyebrows like icicles, he added:  `You see, I am dead, too.'

     "`I hope you'll understand,' said the Prince, controlling himself
almost to a point of conciliation, `that I do not come here to haunt you,
as a mere ghost of those great quarrels.  We will not talk about
who was right or wrong in that, but at least there was one point
on which we were never wrong, because you were always right.
Whatever is to be said of the policy of your family, no one for one moment
imagines that you were moved by the mere gold; you have proved yourself
above the suspicion that...'

     "The old man in the black gown had hitherto continued to gaze at him
with watery blue eyes and a sort of weak wisdom in his face.
But when the word `gold' was said he held out his hand as if
in arrest of something, and turned away his face to the mountains.

     "`He has spoken of gold,' he said.  `He has spoken of
things not lawful.  Let him cease to speak.'

     "Otto had the vice of his Prussian type and tradition,
which is to regard success not as an incident but as a quality.
He conceived himself and his like as perpetually conquering peoples
who were perpetually being conquered.  Consequently, he was ill acquainted
with the emotion of surprise, and ill prepared for the next movement,
which startled and stiffened him.  He had opened his mouth
to answer the hermit, when the mouth was stopped and the voice
strangled by a strong, soft gag suddenly twisted round his head
like a tourniquet.  It was fully forty seconds before he even realized
that the two Hungarian servants had done it, and that they had done it
with his own military scarf.

     "The old man went again weakly to his great brazen-supported Bible,
turned over the leaves, with a patience that had something horrible
about it, till he came to the Epistle of St James, and then began to read:
`The tongue is a little member, but--'

     "Something in the very voice made the Prince turn suddenly
and plunge down the mountain-path he had climbed.  He was half-way towards
the gardens of the palace before he even tried to tear the strangling scarf
from his neck and jaws.  He tried again and again, and it was impossible;
the men who had knotted that gag knew the difference between
what a man can do with his hands in front of him and what he can do
with his hands behind his head.  His legs were free to leap like
an antelope on the mountains, his arms were free to use any gesture
or wave any signal, but he could not speak.  A dumb devil was in him.

     "He had come close to the woods that walled in the castle
before he had quite realized what his wordless state meant
and was meant to mean.  Once more he looked down grimly at the bright,
square labyrinths of the lamp-lit city below him, and he smiled no more.
He felt himself repeating the phrases of his former mood with
a murderous irony.  Far as the eye could see ran the rifles
of his friends, every one of whom would shoot him dead
if he could not answer the challenge.  Rifles were so near that
the wood and ridge could be patrolled at regular intervals;
therefore it was useless to hide in the wood till morning.
Rifles were ranked so far away that an enemy could not slink
into the town by any detour; therefore it was vain to return to the city
by any remote course.  A cry from him would bring his soldiers
rushing up the hill.  But from him no cry would come.

     "The moon had risen in strengthening silver, and the sky showed
in stripes of bright, nocturnal blue between the black stripes
of the pines about the castle.  Flowers of some wide and feathery sort--
for he had never noticed such things before--were at once luminous
and discoloured by the moonshine, and seemed indescribably fantastic
as they clustered, as if crawling about the roots of the trees.
Perhaps his reason had been suddenly unseated by the unnatural captivity
he carried with him, but in that wood he felt something
unfathomably German--the fairy tale.  He knew with half his mind
that he was drawing near to the castle of an ogre--he had forgotten
that he was the ogre.  He remembered asking his mother if bears lived
in the old park at home.  He stooped to pick a flower, as if it were
a charm against enchantment.  The stalk was stronger than he expected,
and broke with a slight snap.  Carefully trying to place it in his scarf,
he heard the halloo, `Who goes there?' Then he remembered the scarf
was not in its usual place.

     "He tried to scream and was silent.  The second challenge came;
and then a shot that shrieked as it came and then was stilled suddenly
by impact.  Otto of Grossenmark lay very peacefully among the fairy
trees, and would do no more harm either with gold or steel; only the
silver pencil of the moon would pick out and trace here and there the
intricate ornament of his uniform, or the old wrinkles on his brow.
May God have mercy on his soul.

     "The sentry who had fired, according to the strict orders
of the garrison, naturally ran forward to find some trace of his quarry.
He was a private named Schwartz, since not unknown in his profession,
and what he found was a bald man in uniform, but with his face
so bandaged by a kind of mask made of his own military scarf
that nothing but open, dead eyes could be seen, glittering stonily
in the moonlight.  The bullet had gone through the gag into the jaw;
that is why there was a shot-hole in the scarf, but only one shot.
Naturally, if not correctly, young Schwartz tore off the mysterious
silken mask and cast it on the grass; and then he saw whom he had slain.

     "We cannot be certain of the next phase.  But I incline to believe
that there was a fairy tale, after all, in that little wood,
horrible as was its occasion.  Whether the young lady named Hedwig
had any previous knowledge of the soldier she saved and eventually married,
or whether she came accidentally upon the accident and their intimacy
began that night, we shall probably never know.  But we can know,
I fancy, that this Hedwig was a heroine, and deserved to marry a man
who became something of a hero.  She did the bold and the wise thing.
She persuaded the sentry to go back to his post, in which place
there was nothing to connect him with the disaster; he was but one of
the most loyal and orderly of fifty such sentries within call.
She remained by the body and gave the alarm; and there was nothing
to connect her with the disaster either, since she had not got,
and could not have, any firearms.

     "Well," said Father Brown rising cheerfully "I hope they're happy."

     "Where are you going?" asked his friend.

     "I'm going to have another look at that portrait of the Chamberlain,
the Arnhold who betrayed his brethren," answered the priest.
"I wonder what part--I wonder if a man is less a traitor when he is
twice a traitor?"

     And he ruminated long before the portrait of a white-haired man
with black eyebrows and a pink, painted sort of smile that seemed
to contradict the black warning in his eyes.

